introductory_courses/python/01_running_python.md, before:

---
name: Running Python
dependsOn: []
tags: [python]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
    url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
    image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Before starting this course, you should install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) and [Python](https://www.python.org/).

Python is a programming language, a collection of syntax rules and keywords that can be used to specify operations to be executed by a computer.
But how to go from these instructions to actual operations carried out by a computer?
This translation and execution is the job of the _Python runtime_, a piece of software that, given some instructions in Python, translates them into machine code and runs them.
The Python runtime is, most of the time, called Python, confusing the software that interprets the language with the language
itself.
This language shortcut is harmless most of the time, but it's good to know that this it _is_ a shortcut.

## Starting Python

You can start Python (the _Python runtime_) through the command line or through an application also called
`Python`.

### macOS - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the command line through the Terminal.
There are two ways to open Terminal on Mac.

1. In your Applications folder, open Utilities and double-click on Terminal
2. Press **_Command_** + **_spacebar_** to launch Spotlight. Type `Terminal` and then double-click the search result or hit **_Enter_**

After you have launched Terminal, type the command to start Python

```bash
python
```

### Windows Users - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the Terminal.

Press **_Windows Logo Key_** and search for `Terminal`, click the result or press enter.

After you have launched the Terminal, type the command:

```bash
python
```

### GNU/Linux Users - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the terminal emulator.
You can usually find it under "Accessories".

After you have launched the terminal emulator, type the command:

```bash
python
```

### Using the Python application

Instead of launching the terminal, you can instead search for and launch the Python application in a similar way.

## First steps with Python

To start off with, you can think of Python as a fancy calculator.
You issue commands, hit ENTER, and the result appears on the line below.

Give some of the examples below a try.
Type the lines preceded by `>>>` or `...` and hit ENTER between each one.

Try to guess what these little snippets of Python do, but don't try to understand the details of them yet - it will be clear to you by the end of this course.

```python nolint
>>> 1 + 6

7
```

```python nolint
>>> a = 2
>>> b = 3
>>> a + b

5
```

```python nolint
>>> print("Just printing this on the screen")

Just printing this on the screen
```

```python nolint
>>> word = "Hello"
>>> len(word)

5
```

```python nolint
>>> for word in ["Leeds", "Munich", "Marseille"]:
...   print("City name has", len(word), "letters in it.")
...

City name has 5 letters in it.
City name has 6 letters in it.
City name has 9 letters in it.
```

```python nolint
>>> for word in ["London", 3, "Marseille"]:
...   print("City name has", len(word), "letters in it.")
...
City name has 6 letters in it.
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
TypeError: object of type 'int' has no len()
```

## Quitting

You can quit Python by typing:

```python nolint
>>> quit()
```

then ENTER.

## The REPL

Running Python interactively from the command line, one command after the other, is commonly referred to as using the _Read-Eval-Print-Loop_ (REPL, pronounced "repel").
Indeed, when doing so, Python **reads** the command, **evaluates** it, **prints** the result and **loops** (goes back to waiting for the next command).

The REPL allows for very quick feedback while drafting a Python program or exploring data.
It makes it very easy to test a few lines of code and build programs iteratively.

Commit message:

Update 01_running_python.md learning outcomes

introductory_courses/python/01_running_python.md, after:

---
name: Running Python
dependsOn: []
tags: [python]
learningOutcomes:
  - Accessing Python.
  - Interact with Python using the Read-Eval-Print-Loop.
attribution:
  - citation: >
      "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
    url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
    image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Before starting this course, you should install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) and [Python](https://www.python.org/).

Python is a programming language, a collection of syntax rules and keywords that can be used to specify operations to be executed by a computer.
But how to go from these instructions to actual operations carried out by a computer?
This translation and execution is the job of the _Python runtime_, a piece of software that, given some instructions in Python, translates them into machine code and runs them.
The Python runtime is, most of the time, called Python, confusing the software that interprets the language with the language
itself.
This language shortcut is harmless most of the time, but it's good to know that this it _is_ a shortcut.

## Starting Python

You can start Python (the _Python runtime_) through the command line or through an application also called
`Python`.

### macOS - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the command line through the Terminal.
There are two ways to open Terminal on Mac.

1. In your Applications folder, open Utilities and double-click on Terminal
2. Press **_Command_** + **_spacebar_** to launch Spotlight. Type `Terminal` and then double-click the search result or hit **_Enter_**

After you have launched Terminal, type the command to start Python

```bash
python
```

### Windows Users - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the Terminal.

Press **_Windows Logo Key_** and search for `Terminal`, click the result or press enter.

After you have launched the Terminal, type the command:

```bash
python
```

### GNU/Linux Users - Command Line

To start Python you will need to access the terminal emulator.
You can usually find it under "Accessories".

After you have launched the terminal emulator, type the command:

```bash
python
```

### Using the Python application

Instead of launching the terminal, you can instead search for and launch the Python application in a similar way.

## First steps with Python

To start off with, you can think of Python as a fancy calculator.
You issue commands, hit ENTER, and the result appears on the line below.

Give some of the examples below a try.
Type the lines preceded by `>>>` or `...` and hit ENTER between each one.

Try to guess what these little snippets of Python do, but don't try to understand the details of them yet - it will be clear to you by the end of this course.

```python nolint
>>> 1 + 6

7
```

```python nolint
>>> a = 2
>>> b = 3
>>> a + b

5
```

```python nolint
>>> print("Just printing this on the screen")

Just printing this on the screen
```

```python nolint
>>> word = "Hello"
>>> len(word)

5
```

```python nolint
>>> for word in ["Leeds", "Munich", "Marseille"]:
...   print("City name has", len(word), "letters in it.")
...

City name has 5 letters in it.
City name has 6 letters in it.
City name has 9 letters in it.
```

```python nolint
>>> for word in ["London", 3, "Marseille"]:
...   print("City name has", len(word), "letters in it.")
...
City name has 6 letters in it.
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
TypeError: object of type 'int' has no len()
```

## Quitting

You can quit Python by typing:

```python nolint
>>> quit()
```

then ENTER.

## The REPL

Running Python interactively from the command line, one command after the other, is commonly referred to as using the _Read-Eval-Print-Loop_ (REPL, pronounced "repel").
Indeed, when doing so, Python **reads** the command, **evaluates** it, **prints** the result and **loops** (goes back to waiting for the next command).

The REPL allows for very quick feedback while drafting a Python program or exploring data.
It makes it very easy to test a few lines of code and build programs iteratively.
