introductory_courses/python/05_libraries.md, before:

---
name: Libraries
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.04_built_in_functions_and_help
]
tags: [python]
---

## Most of the power of a programming language is in its libraries.

*   A *library* is a collection of files (called *modules*) that contains
    functions for use by other programs.
    *   May also contain data values (e.g., numerical constants) and other things.
    *   Library's contents are supposed to be related, but there's no way to enforce that.
*   The Python [standard library][stdlib] is an extensive suite of modules that comes
    with Python itself.
*   Many additional libraries are available from [PyPI][pypi] (the Python Package Index).
*   We will see later how to write new libraries.

> ## Libraries and modules
>
> A library is a collection of modules, but the terms are often used
> interchangeably, especially since many libraries only consist of a single
> module, so don't worry if you mix them.
{: .callout}


## A program must import a library module before using it.

*   Use `import` to load a library module into a program's memory.
*   Then refer to things from the module as `module_name.thing_name`.
    *   Python uses `.` to mean "part of".
*   Using `math`, one of the modules in the standard library:

~~~
import math

print('pi is', math.pi)
print('cos(pi) is', math.cos(math.pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
pi is 3.141592653589793
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

*   Have to refer to each item with the module's name.
    *   `math.cos(pi)` won't work: the reference to `pi`
        doesn't somehow "inherit" the function's reference to `math`.

## Use `help` to learn about the contents of a library module.

*   Works just like help for a function.

~~~
help(math)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
Help on module math:

NAME
    math

MODULE REFERENCE
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/math

    The following documentation is automatically generated from the Python
    source files.  It may be incomplete, incorrect or include features that
    are considered implementation detail and may vary between Python
    implementations.  When in doubt, consult the module reference at the
    location listed above.

DESCRIPTION
    This module is always available.  It provides access to the
    mathematical functions defined by the C standard.

FUNCTIONS
    acos(x, /)
        Return the arc cosine (measured in radians) of x.
⋮ ⋮ ⋮
~~~
{: .output}

## Import specific items from a library module to shorten programs.

*   Use `from ... import ...` to load only specific items from a library module.
*   Then refer to them directly without library name as prefix.

~~~
from math import cos, pi

print('cos(pi) is', cos(pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

## Create an alias for a library module when importing it to shorten programs.

*   Use `import ... as ...` to give a library a short *alias* while importing it.
*   Then refer to items in the library using that shortened name.

~~~
import math as m

print('cos(pi) is', m.cos(m.pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

*   Commonly used for libraries that are frequently used or have long names.
    *   E.g., the `matplotlib` plotting library is often aliased as `mpl`.
*   But can make programs harder to understand,
    since readers must learn your program's aliases.

> ## Locating the Right Module
>
> You want to select a random character from a string:
>
> ~~~
> bases = 'ACTTGCTTGAC'
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> 1. Which [standard library][stdlib] module could help you?
> 2. Which function would you select from that module? Are there alternatives?
> 3. Try to write a program that uses the function.
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > The [random module][randommod] seems like it could help you.
> >
> > The string has 11 characters, each having a positional index from 0 to 10.
> > You could use either `random.randrange` or `random.randint` functions
> > to get a random integer between 0 and
> > 10, and then pick out the character at that position:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import randrange
> >
> > random_index = randrange(len(bases))
> > print(bases[random_index])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > or more compactly:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import randrange
> >
> > print(bases[randrange(len(bases))])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Perhaps you found the `random.sample` function? It allows for slightly
> > less typing:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import sample
> >
> > print(sample(bases, 1)[0])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Note that this function returns a list of values. We will learn about
> > lists in [episode 11]({{ page.root }}/11-lists/).
> >
> > There's also other functions you could use, but with more convoluted
> > code as a result.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}


> ## When Is Help Available?
>
> When a colleague of yours types `help(math)`,
> Python reports an error:
>
> ~~~
> NameError: name 'math' is not defined
> ~~~
> {: .error}
>
> What has your colleague forgotten to do?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > Importing the math module (`import math`)
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Importing With Aliases
>
> 1. Fill in the blanks so that the program below prints `90.0`.
> 2. Rewrite the program so that it uses `import` *without* `as`.
> 3. Which form do you find easier to read?
>
> ~~~
> import math as m
> angle = ____.degrees(____.pi / 2)
> print(____)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > import math as m
> > angle = m.degrees(m.pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > can be written as
> >
> > ~~~
> > import math
> > angle = math.degrees(math.pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Since you just wrote the code and are familiar with it, you might actually
> > find the first version easier to read. But when trying to read a huge piece
> > of code written by someone else, or when getting back to your own huge piece
> > of code after several months, non-abbreviated names are often easier, except
> > where there are clear abbreviation conventions.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## There Are Many Ways To Import Libraries!
>
> Match the following print statements with the appropriate library calls.
>
> Print commands:
>
> 1. `print("sin(pi/2) =", sin(pi/2))`
> 2. `print("sin(pi/2) =", m.sin(m.pi/2))`
> 3. `print("sin(pi/2) =", math.sin(math.pi/2))`
>
> Library calls:
>
> 1. `from math import sin, pi`
> 2. `import math`
> 3. `import math as m`
> 4. `from math import *`
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. Library calls 1 and 4. In order to directly refer to `sin` and `pi` without
> >    the library name as prefix, you need to use the `from ... import ...`
> >    statement. Whereas library call 1 specifically imports the two functions
> >    `sin` and `pi`, library call 4 imports all functions in the `math` module.
> > 2. Library call 3. Here `sin` and `pi` are referred to with a shortened library
> >    name `m` instead of `math`. Library call 3 does exactly that using the
> >    `import ... as ...` syntax - it creates an alias for `math` in the form of
> >    the shortened name `m`.
> > 3. Library call 2. Here `sin` and `pi` are referred to with the regular library
> >    name `math`, so the regular `import ...` call suffices.
> >
> > __Note:__ although library call 4 works, importing all names from a module using a wildcard 
> > import is [not recommended][pep8-imports] as it makes it unclear which names from the module
> > are used in the code. In general it is best to make your imports as specific as possible and to 
> > only import what your code uses. In library call 1, the `import` statement explicitly tells us
> > that the `sin` function is imported from the `math` module, but library call 4 does not
> > convey this information.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Importing Specific Items
>
> 1. Fill in the blanks so that the program below prints `90.0`.
> 2. Do you find this version easier to read than preceding ones?
> 3. Why *wouldn't* programmers always use this form of `import`?
>
> ~~~
> ____ math import ____, ____
> angle = degrees(pi / 2)
> print(angle)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > from math import degrees, pi
> > angle = degrees(pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Most likely you find this version easier to read since it's less dense.
> > The main reason not to use this form of import is to avoid name clashes.
> > For instance, you wouldn't import `degrees` this way if you also wanted to
> > use the name `degrees` for a variable or function of your own. Or if you
> > were to also import a function named `degrees` from another library.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Reading Error Messages
>
> 1. Read the code below and try to identify what the errors are without running it.
> 2. Run the code, and read the error message. What type of error is it?
>
> ~~~
> from math import log
> log(0)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > ~~~
> > ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
> > ValueError                                Traceback (most recent call last)
> > <ipython-input-1-d72e1d780bab> in <module>
> >       1 from math import log
> > ----> 2 log(0)
> > 
> > ValueError: math domain error
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> >
> > 1. The logarithm of `x` is only defined for `x > 0`, so 0 is outside the
> >    domain of the function.
> > 2. You get an error of type `ValueError`, indicating that the function
> >    received an inappropriate argument value. The additional message
> >    "math domain error" makes it clearer what the problem is.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

[pypi]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/
[stdlib]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/
[randommod]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html
[pep8-imports]: https://pep8.org/#imports

Commit message:

Add attribution to original material

introductory_courses/python/05_libraries.md, after:

---
name: Libraries
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.04_built_in_functions_and_help
]
tags: [python]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
      url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
      image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Most of the power of a programming language is in its libraries.

*   A *library* is a collection of files (called *modules*) that contains
    functions for use by other programs.
    *   May also contain data values (e.g., numerical constants) and other things.
    *   Library's contents are supposed to be related, but there's no way to enforce that.
*   The Python [standard library][stdlib] is an extensive suite of modules that comes
    with Python itself.
*   Many additional libraries are available from [PyPI][pypi] (the Python Package Index).
*   We will see later how to write new libraries.

> ## Libraries and modules
>
> A library is a collection of modules, but the terms are often used
> interchangeably, especially since many libraries only consist of a single
> module, so don't worry if you mix them.
{: .callout}


## A program must import a library module before using it.

*   Use `import` to load a library module into a program's memory.
*   Then refer to things from the module as `module_name.thing_name`.
    *   Python uses `.` to mean "part of".
*   Using `math`, one of the modules in the standard library:

~~~
import math

print('pi is', math.pi)
print('cos(pi) is', math.cos(math.pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
pi is 3.141592653589793
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

*   Have to refer to each item with the module's name.
    *   `math.cos(pi)` won't work: the reference to `pi`
        doesn't somehow "inherit" the function's reference to `math`.

## Use `help` to learn about the contents of a library module.

*   Works just like help for a function.

~~~
help(math)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
Help on module math:

NAME
    math

MODULE REFERENCE
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/math

    The following documentation is automatically generated from the Python
    source files.  It may be incomplete, incorrect or include features that
    are considered implementation detail and may vary between Python
    implementations.  When in doubt, consult the module reference at the
    location listed above.

DESCRIPTION
    This module is always available.  It provides access to the
    mathematical functions defined by the C standard.

FUNCTIONS
    acos(x, /)
        Return the arc cosine (measured in radians) of x.
⋮ ⋮ ⋮
~~~
{: .output}

## Import specific items from a library module to shorten programs.

*   Use `from ... import ...` to load only specific items from a library module.
*   Then refer to them directly without library name as prefix.

~~~
from math import cos, pi

print('cos(pi) is', cos(pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

## Create an alias for a library module when importing it to shorten programs.

*   Use `import ... as ...` to give a library a short *alias* while importing it.
*   Then refer to items in the library using that shortened name.

~~~
import math as m

print('cos(pi) is', m.cos(m.pi))
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
cos(pi) is -1.0
~~~
{: .output}

*   Commonly used for libraries that are frequently used or have long names.
    *   E.g., the `matplotlib` plotting library is often aliased as `mpl`.
*   But can make programs harder to understand,
    since readers must learn your program's aliases.

> ## Locating the Right Module
>
> You want to select a random character from a string:
>
> ~~~
> bases = 'ACTTGCTTGAC'
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> 1. Which [standard library][stdlib] module could help you?
> 2. Which function would you select from that module? Are there alternatives?
> 3. Try to write a program that uses the function.
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > The [random module][randommod] seems like it could help you.
> >
> > The string has 11 characters, each having a positional index from 0 to 10.
> > You could use either `random.randrange` or `random.randint` functions
> > to get a random integer between 0 and
> > 10, and then pick out the character at that position:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import randrange
> >
> > random_index = randrange(len(bases))
> > print(bases[random_index])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > or more compactly:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import randrange
> >
> > print(bases[randrange(len(bases))])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Perhaps you found the `random.sample` function? It allows for slightly
> > less typing:
> >
> > ~~~
> > from random import sample
> >
> > print(sample(bases, 1)[0])
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Note that this function returns a list of values. We will learn about
> > lists in [episode 11]({{ page.root }}/11-lists/).
> >
> > There's also other functions you could use, but with more convoluted
> > code as a result.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}


> ## When Is Help Available?
>
> When a colleague of yours types `help(math)`,
> Python reports an error:
>
> ~~~
> NameError: name 'math' is not defined
> ~~~
> {: .error}
>
> What has your colleague forgotten to do?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > Importing the math module (`import math`)
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Importing With Aliases
>
> 1. Fill in the blanks so that the program below prints `90.0`.
> 2. Rewrite the program so that it uses `import` *without* `as`.
> 3. Which form do you find easier to read?
>
> ~~~
> import math as m
> angle = ____.degrees(____.pi / 2)
> print(____)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > import math as m
> > angle = m.degrees(m.pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > can be written as
> >
> > ~~~
> > import math
> > angle = math.degrees(math.pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Since you just wrote the code and are familiar with it, you might actually
> > find the first version easier to read. But when trying to read a huge piece
> > of code written by someone else, or when getting back to your own huge piece
> > of code after several months, non-abbreviated names are often easier, except
> > where there are clear abbreviation conventions.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## There Are Many Ways To Import Libraries!
>
> Match the following print statements with the appropriate library calls.
>
> Print commands:
>
> 1. `print("sin(pi/2) =", sin(pi/2))`
> 2. `print("sin(pi/2) =", m.sin(m.pi/2))`
> 3. `print("sin(pi/2) =", math.sin(math.pi/2))`
>
> Library calls:
>
> 1. `from math import sin, pi`
> 2. `import math`
> 3. `import math as m`
> 4. `from math import *`
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. Library calls 1 and 4. In order to directly refer to `sin` and `pi` without
> >    the library name as prefix, you need to use the `from ... import ...`
> >    statement. Whereas library call 1 specifically imports the two functions
> >    `sin` and `pi`, library call 4 imports all functions in the `math` module.
> > 2. Library call 3. Here `sin` and `pi` are referred to with a shortened library
> >    name `m` instead of `math`. Library call 3 does exactly that using the
> >    `import ... as ...` syntax - it creates an alias for `math` in the form of
> >    the shortened name `m`.
> > 3. Library call 2. Here `sin` and `pi` are referred to with the regular library
> >    name `math`, so the regular `import ...` call suffices.
> >
> > __Note:__ although library call 4 works, importing all names from a module using a wildcard 
> > import is [not recommended][pep8-imports] as it makes it unclear which names from the module
> > are used in the code. In general it is best to make your imports as specific as possible and to 
> > only import what your code uses. In library call 1, the `import` statement explicitly tells us
> > that the `sin` function is imported from the `math` module, but library call 4 does not
> > convey this information.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Importing Specific Items
>
> 1. Fill in the blanks so that the program below prints `90.0`.
> 2. Do you find this version easier to read than preceding ones?
> 3. Why *wouldn't* programmers always use this form of `import`?
>
> ~~~
> ____ math import ____, ____
> angle = degrees(pi / 2)
> print(angle)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > from math import degrees, pi
> > angle = degrees(pi / 2)
> > print(angle)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> >
> > Most likely you find this version easier to read since it's less dense.
> > The main reason not to use this form of import is to avoid name clashes.
> > For instance, you wouldn't import `degrees` this way if you also wanted to
> > use the name `degrees` for a variable or function of your own. Or if you
> > were to also import a function named `degrees` from another library.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Reading Error Messages
>
> 1. Read the code below and try to identify what the errors are without running it.
> 2. Run the code, and read the error message. What type of error is it?
>
> ~~~
> from math import log
> log(0)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> > ~~~
> > ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
> > ValueError                                Traceback (most recent call last)
> > <ipython-input-1-d72e1d780bab> in <module>
> >       1 from math import log
> > ----> 2 log(0)
> > 
> > ValueError: math domain error
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> >
> > 1. The logarithm of `x` is only defined for `x > 0`, so 0 is outside the
> >    domain of the function.
> > 2. You get an error of type `ValueError`, indicating that the function
> >    received an inappropriate argument value. The additional message
> >    "math domain error" makes it clearer what the problem is.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

[pypi]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/
[stdlib]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/
[randommod]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html
[pep8-imports]: https://pep8.org/#imports
