introductory_courses/python/10_conditionals.md, before:

---
name: Conditionals
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.09_for_loops
]
tags: [python]
---

## Use `if` statements to control whether or not a block of code is executed.

*   An `if` statement (more properly called a *conditional* statement)
    controls whether some block of code is executed or not.
*   Structure is similar to a `for` statement:
    *   First line opens with `if` and ends with a colon
    *   Body containing one or more statements is indented (usually by 4 spaces)

~~~
mass = 3.54
if mass > 3.0:
    print(mass, 'is large')

mass = 2.07
if mass > 3.0:
    print(mass, 'is large')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
~~~
{: .output}

## Conditionals are often used inside loops.

*   Not much point using a conditional when we know the value (as above).
*   But useful when we have a collection to process.

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
9.22 is large
~~~
{: .output}

## Use `else` to execute a block of code when an `if` condition is *not* true.

*   `else` can be used following an `if`.
*   Allows us to specify an alternative to execute when the `if` *branch* isn't taken.

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
    else:
        print(m, 'is small')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
2.07 is small
9.22 is large
1.86 is small
1.71 is small
~~~
{: .output}

## Use `elif` to specify additional tests.

*   May want to provide several alternative choices, each with its own test.
*   Use `elif` (short for "else if") and a condition to specify these.
*   Always associated with an `if`.
*   Must come before the `else` (which is the "catch all").

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 9.0:
        print(m, 'is HUGE')
    elif m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
    else:
        print(m, 'is small')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
2.07 is small
9.22 is HUGE
1.86 is small
1.71 is small
~~~
{: .output}

## Conditions are tested once, in order.

*   Python steps through the branches of the conditional in order, testing each in turn.
*   So ordering matters.

~~~
grade = 85
if grade >= 70:
    print('grade is C')
elif grade >= 80:
    print('grade is B')
elif grade >= 90:
    print('grade is A')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
grade is C
~~~
{: .output}

*   Does *not* automatically go back and re-evaluate if values change.

~~~
velocity = 10.0
if velocity > 20.0:
    print('moving too fast')
else:
    print('adjusting velocity')
    velocity = 50.0
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
adjusting velocity
~~~
{: .output}

*   Often use conditionals in a loop to "evolve" the values of variables.

~~~
velocity = 10.0
for i in range(5): # execute the loop 5 times
    print(i, ':', velocity)
    if velocity > 20.0:
        print('moving too fast')
        velocity = velocity - 5.0
    else:
        print('moving too slow')
        velocity = velocity + 10.0
print('final velocity:', velocity)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
0 : 10.0
moving too slow
1 : 20.0
moving too slow
2 : 30.0
moving too fast
3 : 25.0
moving too fast
4 : 20.0
moving too slow
final velocity: 30.0
~~~
{: .output}

## Create a table showing variables' values to trace a program's execution.

<table>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>i</strong></td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>velocity</strong></td>
    <td>10.0</td>
    <td>20.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>30.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>25.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>20.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>30.0</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*   The program must have a `print` statement *outside* the body of the loop
    to show the final value of `velocity`,
    since its value is updated by the last iteration of the loop.

> ## Compound Relations Using `and`, `or`, and Parentheses
>
> Often, you want some combination of things to be true.  You can combine
> relations within a conditional using `and` and `or`.  Continuing the example
> above, suppose you have
>
> ~~~
> mass     = [ 3.54,  2.07,  9.22,  1.86,  1.71]
> velocity = [10.00, 20.00, 30.00, 25.00, 20.00]
>
> i = 0
> for i in range(5):
>     if mass[i] > 5 and velocity[i] > 20:
>         print("Fast heavy object.  Duck!")
>     elif mass[i] > 2 and mass[i] <= 5 and velocity[i] <= 20:
>         print("Normal traffic")
>     elif mass[i] <= 2 and velocity[i] <= 20:
>         print("Slow light object.  Ignore it")
>     else:
>         print("Whoa!  Something is up with the data.  Check it")
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> Just like with arithmetic, you can and should use parentheses whenever there
> is possible ambiguity.  A good general rule is to *always* use parentheses
> when mixing `and` and `or` in the same condition.  That is, instead of:
>
> ~~~
> if mass[i] <= 2 or mass[i] >= 5 and velocity[i] > 20:
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> write one of these:
>
> ~~~
> if (mass[i] <= 2 or mass[i] >= 5) and velocity[i] > 20:
> if mass[i] <= 2 or (mass[i] >= 5 and velocity[i] > 20):
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> so it is perfectly clear to a reader (and to Python) what you really mean.
{: .callout}

> ## Tracing Execution
>
> What does this program print?
>
> ~~~
> pressure = 71.9
> if pressure > 50.0:
>     pressure = 25.0
> elif pressure <= 50.0:
>     pressure = 0.0
> print(pressure)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > 25.0
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Trimming Values
>
> Fill in the blanks so that this program creates a new list
> containing zeroes where the original list's values were negative
> and ones where the original list's values were positive.
>
> ~~~
> original = [-1.5, 0.2, 0.4, 0.0, -1.3, 0.4]
> result = ____
> for value in original:
>     if ____:
>         result.append(0)
>     else:
>         ____
> print(result)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> ~~~
> [0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1]
> ~~~
> {: .output}
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > original = [-1.5, 0.2, 0.4, 0.0, -1.3, 0.4]
> > result = []
> > for value in original:
> >     if value < 0.0:
> >         result.append(0)
> >     else:
> >         result.append(1)
> > print(result)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Processing Small Files
>
> Modify this program so that it only processes files with fewer than 50 records.
>
> ~~~
> import glob
> import pandas as pd
> for filename in glob.glob('data/*.csv'):
>     contents = pd.read_csv(filename)
>     ____:
>         print(filename, len(contents))
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > import glob
> > import pandas as pd
> > for filename in glob.glob('data/*.csv'):
> >     contents = pd.read_csv(filename)
> >     if len(contents) < 50:
> >         print(filename, len(contents))
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Initializing
>
> Modify this program so that it finds the largest and smallest values in the list
> no matter what the range of values originally is.
>
> ~~~
> values = [...some test data...]
> smallest, largest = None, None
> for v in values:
>     if ____:
>         smallest, largest = v, v
>     ____:
>         smallest = min(____, v)
>         largest = max(____, v)
> print(smallest, largest)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> What are the advantages and disadvantages of using this method
> to find the range of the data?
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > values = [-2,1,65,78,-54,-24,100]
> > smallest, largest = None, None
> > for v in values:
> >     if smallest == None and largest == None:
> >         smallest, largest = v, v
> >     else:
> >         smallest = min(smallest, v)
> >         largest = max(largest, v)
> > print(smallest, largest)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> > It can be argued that an advantage of using this method would be to make the code more readable.
> > However, readability is in the eye of the beholder, so another reader may prefer this approach:
> >
> > ~~~
> > values = [-2,1,65,78,-54,-24,100]
> > smallest, largest = None, None
> > for v in values:
> >     if smallest == None or v < smallest:
> >         smallest = v
> >     if largest == None or v > largest:
> >         largest = v
> > print(smallest, largest)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Using Functions With Conditionals in Pandas
>
> Functions will often contain conditionals.  Here is a short example that
> will indicate which quartile the argument is in based on hand-coded values
> for the quartile cut points.
>
> ~~~
> def calculate_life_quartile(exp):
>     if exp < 58.41:
>         # This observation is in the first quartile
>         return 1
>     elif exp >= 58.41 and exp < 67.05:
>         # This observation is in the second quartile
>        return 2
>     elif exp >= 67.05 and exp < 71.70:
>         # This observation is in the third quartile
>        return 3
>     elif exp >= 71.70:
>         # This observation is in the fourth quartile
>        return 4
>     else:
>         # This observation has bad data
>        return None
>
> calculate_life_quartile(62.5)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> ~~~
> 2
> ~~~
> {: .output}
>
> That function would typically be used within a `for` loop, but Pandas has
> a different, more efficient way of doing the same thing, and that is by
> *applying* a function to a dataframe or a portion of a dataframe.  Here
> is an example, using the definition above.
>
> ~~~
> data = pd.read_csv('data/gapminder_all.csv')
> data['life_qrtl'] = data['lifeExp_1952'].apply(calculate_life_quartile)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> There is a lot in that second line, so let's take it piece by piece.
> On the right side of the `=` we start with `data['lifeExp']`, which is the
> column in the dataframe called `data` labeled `lifExp`.  We use the
> `apply()` to do what it says, apply the `calculate_life_quartile` to the
> value of this column for every row in the dataframe.
{: .callout}

Commit message:

Add attribution to original material

introductory_courses/python/10_conditionals.md, after:

---
name: Conditionals
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.09_for_loops
]
tags: [python]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
      url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
      image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Use `if` statements to control whether or not a block of code is executed.

*   An `if` statement (more properly called a *conditional* statement)
    controls whether some block of code is executed or not.
*   Structure is similar to a `for` statement:
    *   First line opens with `if` and ends with a colon
    *   Body containing one or more statements is indented (usually by 4 spaces)

~~~
mass = 3.54
if mass > 3.0:
    print(mass, 'is large')

mass = 2.07
if mass > 3.0:
    print(mass, 'is large')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
~~~
{: .output}

## Conditionals are often used inside loops.

*   Not much point using a conditional when we know the value (as above).
*   But useful when we have a collection to process.

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
9.22 is large
~~~
{: .output}

## Use `else` to execute a block of code when an `if` condition is *not* true.

*   `else` can be used following an `if`.
*   Allows us to specify an alternative to execute when the `if` *branch* isn't taken.

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
    else:
        print(m, 'is small')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
2.07 is small
9.22 is large
1.86 is small
1.71 is small
~~~
{: .output}

## Use `elif` to specify additional tests.

*   May want to provide several alternative choices, each with its own test.
*   Use `elif` (short for "else if") and a condition to specify these.
*   Always associated with an `if`.
*   Must come before the `else` (which is the "catch all").

~~~
masses = [3.54, 2.07, 9.22, 1.86, 1.71]
for m in masses:
    if m > 9.0:
        print(m, 'is HUGE')
    elif m > 3.0:
        print(m, 'is large')
    else:
        print(m, 'is small')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
3.54 is large
2.07 is small
9.22 is HUGE
1.86 is small
1.71 is small
~~~
{: .output}

## Conditions are tested once, in order.

*   Python steps through the branches of the conditional in order, testing each in turn.
*   So ordering matters.

~~~
grade = 85
if grade >= 70:
    print('grade is C')
elif grade >= 80:
    print('grade is B')
elif grade >= 90:
    print('grade is A')
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
grade is C
~~~
{: .output}

*   Does *not* automatically go back and re-evaluate if values change.

~~~
velocity = 10.0
if velocity > 20.0:
    print('moving too fast')
else:
    print('adjusting velocity')
    velocity = 50.0
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
adjusting velocity
~~~
{: .output}

*   Often use conditionals in a loop to "evolve" the values of variables.

~~~
velocity = 10.0
for i in range(5): # execute the loop 5 times
    print(i, ':', velocity)
    if velocity > 20.0:
        print('moving too fast')
        velocity = velocity - 5.0
    else:
        print('moving too slow')
        velocity = velocity + 10.0
print('final velocity:', velocity)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
0 : 10.0
moving too slow
1 : 20.0
moving too slow
2 : 30.0
moving too fast
3 : 25.0
moving too fast
4 : 20.0
moving too slow
final velocity: 30.0
~~~
{: .output}

## Create a table showing variables' values to trace a program's execution.

<table>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>i</strong></td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><strong>velocity</strong></td>
    <td>10.0</td>
    <td>20.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>30.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>25.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>20.0</td>
    <td>.</td>
    <td>30.0</td>
  </tr>
</table>

*   The program must have a `print` statement *outside* the body of the loop
    to show the final value of `velocity`,
    since its value is updated by the last iteration of the loop.

> ## Compound Relations Using `and`, `or`, and Parentheses
>
> Often, you want some combination of things to be true.  You can combine
> relations within a conditional using `and` and `or`.  Continuing the example
> above, suppose you have
>
> ~~~
> mass     = [ 3.54,  2.07,  9.22,  1.86,  1.71]
> velocity = [10.00, 20.00, 30.00, 25.00, 20.00]
>
> i = 0
> for i in range(5):
>     if mass[i] > 5 and velocity[i] > 20:
>         print("Fast heavy object.  Duck!")
>     elif mass[i] > 2 and mass[i] <= 5 and velocity[i] <= 20:
>         print("Normal traffic")
>     elif mass[i] <= 2 and velocity[i] <= 20:
>         print("Slow light object.  Ignore it")
>     else:
>         print("Whoa!  Something is up with the data.  Check it")
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> Just like with arithmetic, you can and should use parentheses whenever there
> is possible ambiguity.  A good general rule is to *always* use parentheses
> when mixing `and` and `or` in the same condition.  That is, instead of:
>
> ~~~
> if mass[i] <= 2 or mass[i] >= 5 and velocity[i] > 20:
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> write one of these:
>
> ~~~
> if (mass[i] <= 2 or mass[i] >= 5) and velocity[i] > 20:
> if mass[i] <= 2 or (mass[i] >= 5 and velocity[i] > 20):
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> so it is perfectly clear to a reader (and to Python) what you really mean.
{: .callout}

> ## Tracing Execution
>
> What does this program print?
>
> ~~~
> pressure = 71.9
> if pressure > 50.0:
>     pressure = 25.0
> elif pressure <= 50.0:
>     pressure = 0.0
> print(pressure)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > 25.0
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Trimming Values
>
> Fill in the blanks so that this program creates a new list
> containing zeroes where the original list's values were negative
> and ones where the original list's values were positive.
>
> ~~~
> original = [-1.5, 0.2, 0.4, 0.0, -1.3, 0.4]
> result = ____
> for value in original:
>     if ____:
>         result.append(0)
>     else:
>         ____
> print(result)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> ~~~
> [0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1]
> ~~~
> {: .output}
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > original = [-1.5, 0.2, 0.4, 0.0, -1.3, 0.4]
> > result = []
> > for value in original:
> >     if value < 0.0:
> >         result.append(0)
> >     else:
> >         result.append(1)
> > print(result)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Processing Small Files
>
> Modify this program so that it only processes files with fewer than 50 records.
>
> ~~~
> import glob
> import pandas as pd
> for filename in glob.glob('data/*.csv'):
>     contents = pd.read_csv(filename)
>     ____:
>         print(filename, len(contents))
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > import glob
> > import pandas as pd
> > for filename in glob.glob('data/*.csv'):
> >     contents = pd.read_csv(filename)
> >     if len(contents) < 50:
> >         print(filename, len(contents))
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Initializing
>
> Modify this program so that it finds the largest and smallest values in the list
> no matter what the range of values originally is.
>
> ~~~
> values = [...some test data...]
> smallest, largest = None, None
> for v in values:
>     if ____:
>         smallest, largest = v, v
>     ____:
>         smallest = min(____, v)
>         largest = max(____, v)
> print(smallest, largest)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> What are the advantages and disadvantages of using this method
> to find the range of the data?
> > ## Solution
> >
> > ~~~
> > values = [-2,1,65,78,-54,-24,100]
> > smallest, largest = None, None
> > for v in values:
> >     if smallest == None and largest == None:
> >         smallest, largest = v, v
> >     else:
> >         smallest = min(smallest, v)
> >         largest = max(largest, v)
> > print(smallest, largest)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> > It can be argued that an advantage of using this method would be to make the code more readable.
> > However, readability is in the eye of the beholder, so another reader may prefer this approach:
> >
> > ~~~
> > values = [-2,1,65,78,-54,-24,100]
> > smallest, largest = None, None
> > for v in values:
> >     if smallest == None or v < smallest:
> >         smallest = v
> >     if largest == None or v > largest:
> >         largest = v
> > print(smallest, largest)
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-python}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Using Functions With Conditionals in Pandas
>
> Functions will often contain conditionals.  Here is a short example that
> will indicate which quartile the argument is in based on hand-coded values
> for the quartile cut points.
>
> ~~~
> def calculate_life_quartile(exp):
>     if exp < 58.41:
>         # This observation is in the first quartile
>         return 1
>     elif exp >= 58.41 and exp < 67.05:
>         # This observation is in the second quartile
>        return 2
>     elif exp >= 67.05 and exp < 71.70:
>         # This observation is in the third quartile
>        return 3
>     elif exp >= 71.70:
>         # This observation is in the fourth quartile
>        return 4
>     else:
>         # This observation has bad data
>        return None
>
> calculate_life_quartile(62.5)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> ~~~
> 2
> ~~~
> {: .output}
>
> That function would typically be used within a `for` loop, but Pandas has
> a different, more efficient way of doing the same thing, and that is by
> *applying* a function to a dataframe or a portion of a dataframe.  Here
> is an example, using the definition above.
>
> ~~~
> data = pd.read_csv('data/gapminder_all.csv')
> data['life_qrtl'] = data['lifeExp_1952'].apply(calculate_life_quartile)
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
>
> There is a lot in that second line, so let's take it piece by piece.
> On the right side of the `=` we start with `data['lifeExp']`, which is the
> column in the dataframe called `data` labeled `lifExp`.  We use the
> `apply()` to do what it says, apply the `calculate_life_quartile` to the
> value of this column for every row in the dataframe.
{: .callout}
