introductory_courses/python/14_variable_scope.md, before:

---
name: Variable Scope
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.13_writing_functions
]
tags: [python]
---

## The scope of a variable is the part of a program that can 'see' that variable.

*   There are only so many sensible names for variables.
*   People using functions shouldn't have to worry about
    what variable names the author of the function used.
*   People writing functions shouldn't have to worry about
    what variable names the function's caller uses.
*   The part of a program in which a variable is visible is called its *scope*.

~~~
pressure = 103.9

def adjust(t):
    temperature = t * 1.43 / pressure
    return temperature
~~~
{: .language-python}

*   `pressure` is a *global variable*.
    *   Defined outside any particular function.
    *   Visible everywhere.
*   `t` and `temperature` are *local variables* in `adjust`.
    *   Defined in the function.
    *   Not visible in the main program.
    *   Remember: a function parameter is a variable
        that is automatically assigned a value when the function is called.

~~~
print('adjusted:', adjust(0.9))
print('temperature after call:', temperature)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
adjusted: 0.01238691049085659
~~~
{: .output}
~~~
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/swcarpentry/foo.py", line 8, in <module>
    print('temperature after call:', temperature)
NameError: name 'temperature' is not defined
~~~
{: .error}

> ## Local and Global Variable Use
>
> Trace the values of all variables in this program as it is executed.
> (Use '---' as the value of variables before and after they exist.)
>
> ~~~
> limit = 100
>
> def clip(value):
>     return min(max(0.0, value), limit)
>
> value = -22.5
> print(clip(value))
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
{: .challenge}

> ## Reading Error Messages
>
> Read the traceback below, and identify the following:
>
> 1. How many levels does the traceback have?
> 2. What is the file name where the error occurred?
> 3. What is the function name where the error occurred?
> 4. On which line number in this function did the error occur?
> 5. What is the type of error?
> 6. What is the error message?
>
> ~~~
> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
> KeyError                                  Traceback (most recent call last)
> <ipython-input-2-e4c4cbafeeb5> in <module>()
>       1 import errors_02
> ----> 2 errors_02.print_friday_message()
>
> /Users/ghopper/thesis/code/errors_02.py in print_friday_message()
>      13
>      14 def print_friday_message():
> ---> 15     print_message("Friday")
>
> /Users/ghopper/thesis/code/errors_02.py in print_message(day)
>       9         "sunday": "Aw, the weekend is almost over."
>      10     }
> ---> 11     print(messages[day])
>      12
>      13
>
> KeyError: 'Friday'
> ~~~
> {: .error}
> > ## Solution
> > 1. Three levels.
> > 2. `errors_02.py`
> > 3. `print_message`
> > 4. Line 11
> > 5. `KeyError`. These errors occur when we are trying to look up a key that does not exist (usually in a data
> > structure such as a dictionary). We can find more information about the `KeyError` and other built-in exceptions
> > in the [Python docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#KeyError).
> > 6. `KeyError: 'Friday'`
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Commit message:

Add attribution to original material

introductory_courses/python/14_variable_scope.md, after:

---
name: Variable Scope
dependsOn: [
    introductory_courses.python.13_writing_functions
]
tags: [python]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
      url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
      image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## The scope of a variable is the part of a program that can 'see' that variable.

*   There are only so many sensible names for variables.
*   People using functions shouldn't have to worry about
    what variable names the author of the function used.
*   People writing functions shouldn't have to worry about
    what variable names the function's caller uses.
*   The part of a program in which a variable is visible is called its *scope*.

~~~
pressure = 103.9

def adjust(t):
    temperature = t * 1.43 / pressure
    return temperature
~~~
{: .language-python}

*   `pressure` is a *global variable*.
    *   Defined outside any particular function.
    *   Visible everywhere.
*   `t` and `temperature` are *local variables* in `adjust`.
    *   Defined in the function.
    *   Not visible in the main program.
    *   Remember: a function parameter is a variable
        that is automatically assigned a value when the function is called.

~~~
print('adjusted:', adjust(0.9))
print('temperature after call:', temperature)
~~~
{: .language-python}
~~~
adjusted: 0.01238691049085659
~~~
{: .output}
~~~
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/swcarpentry/foo.py", line 8, in <module>
    print('temperature after call:', temperature)
NameError: name 'temperature' is not defined
~~~
{: .error}

> ## Local and Global Variable Use
>
> Trace the values of all variables in this program as it is executed.
> (Use '---' as the value of variables before and after they exist.)
>
> ~~~
> limit = 100
>
> def clip(value):
>     return min(max(0.0, value), limit)
>
> value = -22.5
> print(clip(value))
> ~~~
> {: .language-python}
{: .challenge}

> ## Reading Error Messages
>
> Read the traceback below, and identify the following:
>
> 1. How many levels does the traceback have?
> 2. What is the file name where the error occurred?
> 3. What is the function name where the error occurred?
> 4. On which line number in this function did the error occur?
> 5. What is the type of error?
> 6. What is the error message?
>
> ~~~
> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
> KeyError                                  Traceback (most recent call last)
> <ipython-input-2-e4c4cbafeeb5> in <module>()
>       1 import errors_02
> ----> 2 errors_02.print_friday_message()
>
> /Users/ghopper/thesis/code/errors_02.py in print_friday_message()
>      13
>      14 def print_friday_message():
> ---> 15     print_message("Friday")
>
> /Users/ghopper/thesis/code/errors_02.py in print_message(day)
>       9         "sunday": "Aw, the weekend is almost over."
>      10     }
> ---> 11     print(messages[day])
>      12
>      13
>
> KeyError: 'Friday'
> ~~~
> {: .error}
> > ## Solution
> > 1. Three levels.
> > 2. `errors_02.py`
> > 3. `print_message`
> > 4. Line 11
> > 5. `KeyError`. These errors occur when we are trying to look up a key that does not exist (usually in a data
> > structure such as a dictionary). We can find more information about the `KeyError` and other built-in exceptions
> > in the [Python docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#KeyError).
> > 6. `KeyError: 'Friday'`
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}
