introductory_courses/python/index.md, before:

---
id: intro_to_python
name: Intro to Python
dependsOn: [
]
files: [
    01_running_python.md,    
    02_variables_and_types.md,
    03_writing_and_running_ide.md,
    04_built_in_functions_and_help.md,
    05_libraries.md,
    06_analyzing_and_visualizing_data.md,
    07_pandas_dataframes.md,
    08_lists.md,
    09_for_loops.md,
    10_conditionals.md,
    11_looping_over_data_sets.md,
    12_errors_and_exceptions.md,
    13_writing_functions.md,
    14_variable_scope.md,
]
---

**Python: A High-Level Overview**

Python is a high-level, interpreted programming language that was developed in the late 1980s by Guido van Rossum.
With an emphasis on code readability and simplicity, Python is designed to be easy to understand and write, making it a popular choice for beginners and experts alike.

**Key Features of Python**

1. **Simplicity:** Python has a clean, easy-to-understand syntax that emphasizes readability and reduces the cost of program maintenance. Python code is designed to be readable and straightforward, making it an ideal language for novice programmers.

2. **Interpreted Language:** Python is an interpreted language, meaning that it is processed at runtime by the interpreter. You do not need to compile your program before executing it, which is similar to languages like PHP and JavaScript.

3. **Dynamically Typed:** In Python, you don't have to declare the data type of a variable. The interpreter infers the data type at runtime.

4. **Multi-Paradigm:** Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.

5. **Extensive Libraries:** Python's standard library is large and versatile, offering a range of modules and functions for tasks like regular expressions, documentation-generation, unit-testing, threading, databases, web browsers, CGI, FTP, email, XML, XML-RPC, HTML, WAV files, cryptography, GUI, and more.

**Python Use Cases**

Python is used in a wide variety of fields:

1. **Web and Internet Development:** Python offers frameworks like Django and Flask which simplify the design and maintenance of sophisticated web applications.

2. **Data Analysis and Visualization:** With libraries like Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib, Python is a popular choice for data analysis and visualization.

3. **Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence:** Libraries like TensorFlow, PyTorch, and Scikit-learn have made Python the go-to language for AI and machine learning.

4. **Automation and Scripting:** Due to its simplicity and powerful standard library, Python is often used for scripting and automating repetitive tasks and processes.

5. **Game Development:** Libraries like Pygame provide the resources necessary for game development.

6. **Scientific Computing:** In areas such as physics, chemistry, and computational biology, Python is used for simulation, mathematical modeling, and more.

7. **Cybersecurity:** Python is often used for creating intrusion detection systems, performing malware analysis, and testing vulnerabilities.

**Python's Philosophy**

The philosophy of Python is outlined in a document called "The Zen of Python", which includes guiding principles like "Readability counts", "Explicit is better than implicit", and "Simple is better than complex". These principles help to guide Python's design and use.

In summary, Python is a versatile, powerful, and easy-to-learn programming language that can be used for a wide range of tasks. From web development to data science, Python is a tool that can support a variety of programming needs.

Commit message:

Add attribution to original material

introductory_courses/python/index.md, after:

---
id: intro_to_python
name: Intro to Python
dependsOn: [
]
files: [
    01_running_python.md,    
    02_variables_and_types.md,
    03_writing_and_running_ide.md,
    04_built_in_functions_and_help.md,
    05_libraries.md,
    06_analyzing_and_visualizing_data.md,
    07_pandas_dataframes.md,
    08_lists.md,
    09_for_loops.md,
    10_conditionals.md,
    11_looping_over_data_sets.md,
    12_errors_and_exceptions.md,
    13_writing_functions.md,
    14_variable_scope.md,
]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Programming with Python" course by the Carpentries
      url: https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/
      image: https://carpentries.org/assets/img/TheCarpentries.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

**Python: A High-Level Overview**

Python is a high-level, interpreted programming language that was developed in the late 1980s by Guido van Rossum.
With an emphasis on code readability and simplicity, Python is designed to be easy to understand and write, making it a popular choice for beginners and experts alike.

**Key Features of Python**

1. **Simplicity:** Python has a clean, easy-to-understand syntax that emphasizes readability and reduces the cost of program maintenance. Python code is designed to be readable and straightforward, making it an ideal language for novice programmers.

2. **Interpreted Language:** Python is an interpreted language, meaning that it is processed at runtime by the interpreter. You do not need to compile your program before executing it, which is similar to languages like PHP and JavaScript.

3. **Dynamically Typed:** In Python, you don't have to declare the data type of a variable. The interpreter infers the data type at runtime.

4. **Multi-Paradigm:** Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.

5. **Extensive Libraries:** Python's standard library is large and versatile, offering a range of modules and functions for tasks like regular expressions, documentation-generation, unit-testing, threading, databases, web browsers, CGI, FTP, email, XML, XML-RPC, HTML, WAV files, cryptography, GUI, and more.

**Python Use Cases**

Python is used in a wide variety of fields:

1. **Web and Internet Development:** Python offers frameworks like Django and Flask which simplify the design and maintenance of sophisticated web applications.

2. **Data Analysis and Visualization:** With libraries like Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib, Python is a popular choice for data analysis and visualization.

3. **Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence:** Libraries like TensorFlow, PyTorch, and Scikit-learn have made Python the go-to language for AI and machine learning.

4. **Automation and Scripting:** Due to its simplicity and powerful standard library, Python is often used for scripting and automating repetitive tasks and processes.

5. **Game Development:** Libraries like Pygame provide the resources necessary for game development.

6. **Scientific Computing:** In areas such as physics, chemistry, and computational biology, Python is used for simulation, mathematical modeling, and more.

7. **Cybersecurity:** Python is often used for creating intrusion detection systems, performing malware analysis, and testing vulnerabilities.

**Python's Philosophy**

The philosophy of Python is outlined in a document called "The Zen of Python", which includes guiding principles like "Readability counts", "Explicit is better than implicit", and "Simple is better than complex". These principles help to guide Python's design and use.

In summary, Python is a versatile, powerful, and easy-to-learn programming language that can be used for a wide range of tasks. From web development to data science, Python is a tool that can support a variety of programming needs.
