scientific_computing/optimisation/02-line-search-methods.md, before:

---
name: Line Search Methods
dependsOn: [scientific_computing.optimisation.01-nonlinear-optimisation]
tags: []
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from material by Martin Robinson from the "Scientific Computing" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

### Gradient descent

One of the simplest local optimisation algoriths is _gradient descent_. It is
initialised at some point in parameter space $a_0$, and at each iteration the function
$f(x)$ is reduced by following the direction of _steepest descent_ $-\nabla f(a)$

$$
a_{n+1} = a_n - \gamma \nabla f(a_n)
$$

This is an example of an important class of algorithms called the _line search_ methods.
These algorithms choose a _search direction_ $p_k$ at each iteration $k$, and search
along the 1D line from the initial point $a_k$ to a new point

$$
a_{k+1} = a_k + \alpha p_k
$$

with a lower function value. The problem at each iteration becomes a one-dimensional
optimisation problem along $p_k$ to find the optimal value of $\alpha$. Each line search
algorithm is thus defined on how it chooses both the search direction $p_k$ and the
optimal $\alpha$.

![animation illustrating gradient descent](images/Gradient_descent.gif)

### Plateaus with low gradient

An obvious downside to simple gradient descent can be seen for functions which have
regions of zero or small gradients, or plateaus. Here a gradient descent algorithm with a
constant $\gamma$ will proceed very slowly, if at all. This motivates another important
line search algorithm, _Newtons method_.

The Newtons direction $p^N_k$ can be derived by considering the second-order Taylor
expansion of the function $f(x)$

$$
f(a_k + p) \approx f(a_k) + p^T \nabla f(a_k) + \frac{1}{2} p^T \nabla^2 f(a_k) p =
m_k(p).
$$

We find the value of $p$ that minimises $m_k(p)$ by setting the derivative of $m_k$ to
zero, leading to

$$
p_k^N = - (\nabla^2 f(a_k))^{-1} \nabla f(a_k)
$$

Unlike the steepest descent, Newtons method has a natural step length $\alpha \approx
1$, which is suitable for a wide variety of problems and can quickly cross areas of low
gradient. Naturally, since the algorithm is based on a _second-order_ approximation of
the function $f$, it works better if this approximation is reasonably accurate.

Newtons method can be used as long as the inverse of the second derivative of the
function $(\nabla^2 f(a_k))^{-1}$, exists (e.g. it will always exist for a positive
definite $\nabla^2 f$). However, even when this inverse does exist it is possible that
the direction $p^N_k$ does not satisfy the descent condition $f(a_k + \alpha p^N_k) <
f(a_k)$ (or equivilently $\nabla f(a_k)^T p^N < 0$), so many modifications to Newtons
methods, falling under a class of methods called _Quasi-Newton_ methods, have been
proposed to satisfy this descent condition.

Quasi-Newton methods do not require the (often onerous) calculation of the hession
$\nabla^2 f(x)$ like Newtons, instead they form an approximation to the hessian $B_k
\approx \nabla^2 f(a_k)$ that is updated at each step using the information given by the
gradient evaluations $\nabla f(a_k)$. Two popular methods of performing this update are
the _symmetric-rank-one_ (SR1), and the _Broyden, Fletcher, Goldfarb, and Shanno,
(BFGS)_ formula. Once the approximation $B_k$ is formed then the search direction is
calculated via

$$
p_k = -B_k^{-1} \nabla f(a_k)
$$

For more details of other line search methods, please see Chapter 3 of the Nocedal and
Wright textbook, or in the other textbooks listed at the end of this lesson. Finally, it
should be noted that the _conjugate gradient_ method can also be used for non-linear
optimisation, where the search direction is given by

$$
p_k = -\nabla f(a_k) + \beta_k p_{k-1}
$$

### Step length

In line search methods, choosing the step length $\alpha_k$ is a non-trivial task.
Ideally we would want to chose $\alpha_k$ to minimise the function along the
one-dimensional search direction $p_k$. That is, we wish to minimise

$$
\phi(\alpha_k) = f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k),\text{ }\alpha_k > 0.
$$

In general it is too expensive to do this minimisation exactly, so approximate methods
are used so that multiple trial $\alpha_k$ values are trialled, stopping when a candidate
is found that satisfies a set of _conditions_. There are two main conditions used, the
_Wolfe conditions_ and the _Goldstein_ conditions.

The two Wolfe conditions are the _sufficient decrease_ condition, which ensures that the
reduction in the function value is proportional to the step length $\alpha_k$ and the
gradient in the direction of the step

$$
f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c_1 \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

The second Wolfe condition is the _curvature_ condition, which prevents unacceptibly
short steps by ensuring that the slope of $\phi$ is greater than some constant $c_2$
times the initial slope $\phi'(0)$

$$
\nabla f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k)^T p_k \ge c_2 \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k,
$$

where $c_2 \in (c_1, 1)$. Typical values are $c_1 = 10^{-4}$ and $c_2 = 0.9$. The
_strong Wolfe_ conditions restrict the gradient $\phi'$ to be small, so as to exclude
points that are too far from stationary points of $\phi$

$$
f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c_1 \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

$$
|\nabla f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k)^T p_k| \le c_2 |\nabla f(a_k)^T p_k|,
$$

The Goldstein conditions are similar in spirit to the Wolfe conditions, and are formed
from the two inequalities

$$
f(a_k) + (1 - c) \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k \le f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c
\alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

with $0 < c < 1/2$. The first inequality prevents small step sizes while the second is
the same sufficient decrease condition as in the Wolfe conditions. The Goldstein
conditions are often used in Newton-type methods but for quasi-Newton methods the Wolfe
conditions are prefered. The diagrams from the text by Nocedal and Wright
illustrate the two conditions

![Wolf versus Goldstein conditions](images/conditions.jpg)

Algorithms for choosing candidate step size values $\alpha_k$ can be complicated, so we
will only mention here one of the simplest, which is the _backtracking_ method. This
approach implicitly satisfies the condition on too small $\alpha_k$, and only repeatedly
test for the common sufficient decrease condition that appears in both the Wolfe and
Goldstein condtitions.

### Backtracking algorithm

Choose $\bar{\alpha} > 0$, $\rho \in (0, 1)$, $c \in (0, 1)$

$\alpha_k := \bar{\alpha}$

**repeat** until $f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k$

> $\alpha_k := \rho \alpha_k$

**end repeat**.

### Software

- Scipy has a wide variety of (mostly) line search and trust region algorithms in
  [`scipy.optimize`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/optimize.html). There
  are 14 local minimisers, so we won't list them all here!
- It is worth noting that Scipy includes the
  [`line_search`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.line_search.html#scipy.optimize.line_search)
  function, which allows you to use their line search satisfying the strong Wolfe
  conditions with your own custom search direction.
- Scipy also includes a
  [`HessianUpdateStrategy`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.HessianUpdateStrategy.html#scipy.optimize.HessianUpdateStrategy),
  which provides an interface for specifying an approximate Hessian for use in
  quasi-Newton methods, along with two implementations
  [`BFGS`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.BFGS.html#scipy.optimize.BFGS)
  and
  [`SR1`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.SR1.html#scipy.optimize.SR1).

### Problems

::::challenge{id=line-search-problems title="Line Search Problems" }

1. Program the steepest descent and Newton algorithms using the backtracking line
   search. Use them to minimize the [Rosenbrock
   function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosenbrock_function). Set the initial step
   length $\alpha_0 = 1$ and print the step length used by each method at each
   iteration. First try the initial point $x_0 = (1.2, 1.2)^T$ and then the more
   difficult starting point $x_0 = (−1.2, 1)^T$.
2. Plot the function surface using `matplotlib` and overlay the line search segments so
   you can visualise the progress of your algorithm. Observe the difference between
   the algorithms when the gradient of the rosenbrock function is low (i.e. at the
   bottom of the curved valley)
3. Repeat (1) and (2) above using the line search implemented in Scipy
   [`scipy.optimize.line_search`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.line_search.html),
   which uses the strong Wolfe conditions.

:::solution

```python
import numpy as np
from matplotlib import cm
import scipy.optimize
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt

def steepest_descent(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f):
    return -grad_f(x)

def newton(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f):
    A = hessian_f(x)
    return -np.linalg.solve(A, grad_f(x))

def backtracking(f, grad_f, x, p):
    alpha = 1.0
    c = 1e-4
    rho = 0.5
    f_x = f(x)
    c_grad_f_x_p = c*grad_f(x).dot(p)
    while f(x + alpha*p) > f_x + alpha * c_grad_f_x_p:
        alpha = rho * alpha
    return alpha

def scipy_line_search(f, grad_f, x, p):
    return scipy.optimize.line_search(f, grad_f, x, p)[0]

def minimise(f, grad_f, hessian_f, x0, tol=1e-5, max_iter=1000, search_direction=steepest_descent, line_search=backtracking):
    x = np.copy(x0)
    alpha = 1.0
    p = np.zeros_like(x)
    p[0] = 1.
    i = 0
    array_x = np.empty((max_iter+1, len(x)), dtype=float)
    array_alpha = np.empty(max_iter, dtype=float)
    array_x[0, :] = x
    while np.linalg.norm(alpha * p) > tol and i < max_iter:
        p = search_direction(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f)
        alpha = line_search(f, grad_f, x, p)
        x += alpha * p
        array_x[i+1, :] = x
        array_alpha[i] = alpha
        i += 1
    return array_x[:i,:], array_alpha[:i]

def rosenbrock(x, y):
    return (1 - x)**2 + (y - x**2)**2

def rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return (1 - x[0])**2 + (x[1] - x[0]**2)**2

def grad_rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return np.array([
        4*x[0] * (x[0]**2 - x[1]) + 2*x[0] - 2,
        -2*x[0]**2 + 2*x[1]
    ])

def hessian_rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return np.array([
        [12 * x[0]**2 - 4*x[1] + 2, -4*x[0]],
        [-4*x[0], 2],
    ])

# verify grad and hessian using finite differences
h = 1e-5
x0 = np.array([0., 0.])
x0_x = np.array([h, 0.])
x0_y = np.array([0., h])
fd_grad_rosenbrock = np.array([
    (rosenbrock_2d(x0_x) - rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
    (rosenbrock_2d(x0_y) - rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
])
np.testing.assert_almost_equal(fd_grad_rosenbrock, grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0), decimal=4)
fd_hessian_rosenbrock = np.vstack((
    (grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0_x) - grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
    (grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0_y) - grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
))
np.testing.assert_almost_equal(fd_hessian_rosenbrock, hessian_rosenbrock_2d(x0),
                               decimal=4)

# plot rosenbrock surface
x = np.linspace(-1.5, 2.0, 100)
y = np.linspace(0.2, 3.0, 100)
X, Y = np.meshgrid(x, y)
Z = np.vectorize(rosenbrock)(X, Y)

fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.gca(projection='3d')
fig2 = plt.figure()
ax2 = fig2.add_subplot(1,1,1)

surf = ax.plot_surface(X, Y, Z, alpha=0.5, cmap=cm.coolwarm)

# pick two initial starting points
x01 = np.array([1.2, 1.2])
x02 = np.array([-1.2, 1])

# run all methods and plot results
for x0 in [x01, x02]:
    for p_method in [steepest_descent, newton]:
        for ls_method in [backtracking, scipy_line_search]:
            label = '{}-{}'.format(p_method.__name__, ls_method.__name__)
            pos, alpha = \
                minimise(rosenbrock_2d, grad_rosenbrock_2d, hessian_rosenbrock_2d, x0,
                         search_direction=p_method, line_search=ls_method)
            print('method', label, 'finished in', len(alpha), 'iterations')
            xs = pos[:, 0]
            ys = pos[:, 1]
            ax.plot(xs, ys, rosenbrock(xs, ys), label=label, linewidth=2)
            ax2.plot(alpha, label=label)
ax2.legend()
plt.show()
```

:::
::::

Commit message:

Add learning outcomes to Optimisation (#172)
* add learning outcomes to 01-nonlinear-optimisation.md

* add learning outcomes to 02-line-search-methods.md

scientific_computing/optimisation/02-line-search-methods.md, after:

---
name: Line Search Methods
dependsOn: [scientific_computing.optimisation.01-nonlinear-optimisation]
tags: []
learningOutcomes:
  - Understand the gradient descent algorithm as an example of a line search method for local optimisation.
  - For plateaus with low gradient, understand the Newtons method and Quasi-Newton method.
  - Be able to choose the step length in a line search method.
  - Familiarise with Wolfe and Goldstein conditions.
  - Understand the backtracking algorithm.
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from material by Martin Robinson from the "Scientific Computing" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

### Gradient descent

One of the simplest local optimisation algorithms is _gradient descent_. It is
initialised at some point in parameter space $a_0$, and at each iteration the function
$f(x)$ is reduced by following the direction of _steepest descent_ $-\nabla f(a)$

$$
a_{n+1} = a_n - \gamma \nabla f(a_n)
$$

This is an example of an important class of algorithms called the _line search_ methods.
These algorithms choose a _search direction_ $p_k$ at each iteration $k$, and search
along the 1D line from the initial point $a_k$ to a new point

$$
a_{k+1} = a_k + \alpha p_k
$$

with a lower function value. The problem at each iteration becomes a one-dimensional
optimisation problem along $p_k$ to find the optimal value of $\alpha$. Each line search
algorithm is thus defined on how it chooses both the search direction $p_k$ and the
optimal $\alpha$.

![animation illustrating gradient descent](images/Gradient_descent.gif)

### Plateaus with low gradient

An obvious downside to simple gradient descent can be seen for functions which have
regions of zero or small gradients, or plateaus. Here a gradient descent algorithm with a
constant $\gamma$ will proceed very slowly, if at all. This motivates another important
line search algorithm, _Newtons method_.

The Newtons direction $p^N_k$ can be derived by considering the second-order Taylor
expansion of the function $f(x)$

$$
f(a_k + p) \approx f(a_k) + p^T \nabla f(a_k) + \frac{1}{2} p^T \nabla^2 f(a_k) p =
m_k(p).
$$

We find the value of $p$ that minimises $m_k(p)$ by setting the derivative of $m_k$ to
zero, leading to

$$
p_k^N = - (\nabla^2 f(a_k))^{-1} \nabla f(a_k)
$$

Unlike the steepest descent, Newtons method has a natural step length $\alpha \approx
1$, which is suitable for a wide variety of problems and can quickly cross areas of low
gradient. Naturally, since the algorithm is based on a _second-order_ approximation of
the function $f$, it works better if this approximation is reasonably accurate.

Newtons method can be used as long as the inverse of the second derivative of the
function $(\nabla^2 f(a_k))^{-1}$, exists (e.g. it will always exist for a positive
definite $\nabla^2 f$). However, even when this inverse does exist it is possible that
the direction $p^N_k$ does not satisfy the descent condition $f(a_k + \alpha p^N_k) <
f(a_k)$ (or equivilently $\nabla f(a_k)^T p^N < 0$), so many modifications to Newtons
methods, falling under a class of methods called _Quasi-Newton_ methods, have been
proposed to satisfy this descent condition.

Quasi-Newton methods do not require the (often onerous) calculation of the hession
$\nabla^2 f(x)$ like Newtons, instead they form an approximation to the hessian $B_k
\approx \nabla^2 f(a_k)$ that is updated at each step using the information given by the
gradient evaluations $\nabla f(a_k)$. Two popular methods of performing this update are
the _symmetric-rank-one_ (SR1), and the _Broyden, Fletcher, Goldfarb, and Shanno,
(BFGS)_ formula. Once the approximation $B_k$ is formed then the search direction is
calculated via

$$
p_k = -B_k^{-1} \nabla f(a_k)
$$

For more details of other line search methods, please see Chapter 3 of the Nocedal and
Wright textbook, or in the other textbooks listed at the end of this lesson. Finally, it
should be noted that the _conjugate gradient_ method can also be used for non-linear
optimisation, where the search direction is given by

$$
p_k = -\nabla f(a_k) + \beta_k p_{k-1}
$$

### Step length

In line search methods, choosing the step length $\alpha_k$ is a non-trivial task.
Ideally we would want to chose $\alpha_k$ to minimise the function along the
one-dimensional search direction $p_k$. That is, we wish to minimise

$$
\phi(\alpha_k) = f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k),\text{ }\alpha_k > 0.
$$

In general it is too expensive to do this minimisation exactly, so approximate methods
are used so that multiple trial $\alpha_k$ values are trialled, stopping when a candidate
is found that satisfies a set of _conditions_. There are two main conditions used, the
_Wolfe conditions_ and the _Goldstein_ conditions.

The two Wolfe conditions are the _sufficient decrease_ condition, which ensures that the
reduction in the function value is proportional to the step length $\alpha_k$ and the
gradient in the direction of the step

$$
f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c_1 \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

The second Wolfe condition is the _curvature_ condition, which prevents unacceptibly
short steps by ensuring that the slope of $\phi$ is greater than some constant $c_2$
times the initial slope $\phi'(0)$

$$
\nabla f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k)^T p_k \ge c_2 \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k,
$$

where $c_2 \in (c_1, 1)$. Typical values are $c_1 = 10^{-4}$ and $c_2 = 0.9$. The
_strong Wolfe_ conditions restrict the gradient $\phi'$ to be small, so as to exclude
points that are too far from stationary points of $\phi$

$$
f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c_1 \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

$$
|\nabla f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k)^T p_k| \le c_2 |\nabla f(a_k)^T p_k|,
$$

The Goldstein conditions are similar in spirit to the Wolfe conditions, and are formed
from the two inequalities

$$
f(a_k) + (1 - c) \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k \le f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c
\alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k.
$$

with $0 < c < 1/2$. The first inequality prevents small step sizes while the second is
the same sufficient decrease condition as in the Wolfe conditions. The Goldstein
conditions are often used in Newton-type methods but for quasi-Newton methods the Wolfe
conditions are prefered. The diagrams from the text by Nocedal and Wright
illustrate the two conditions

![Wolf versus Goldstein conditions](images/conditions.jpg)

Algorithms for choosing candidate step size values $\alpha_k$ can be complicated, so we
will only mention here one of the simplest, which is the _backtracking_ method. This
approach implicitly satisfies the condition on too small $\alpha_k$, and only repeatedly
test for the common sufficient decrease condition that appears in both the Wolfe and
Goldstein condtitions.

### Backtracking algorithm

Choose $\bar{\alpha} > 0$, $\rho \in (0, 1)$, $c \in (0, 1)$

$\alpha_k := \bar{\alpha}$

**repeat** until $f(a_k + \alpha_k p_k) \le f(a_k) + c \alpha_k \nabla f(a_k)^T p_k$

> $\alpha_k := \rho \alpha_k$

**end repeat**.

### Software

- Scipy has a wide variety of (mostly) line search and trust region algorithms in
  [`scipy.optimize`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/optimize.html). There
  are 14 local minimisers, so we won't list them all here!
- It is worth noting that Scipy includes the
  [`line_search`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.line_search.html#scipy.optimize.line_search)
  function, which allows you to use their line search satisfying the strong Wolfe
  conditions with your own custom search direction.
- Scipy also includes a
  [`HessianUpdateStrategy`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.HessianUpdateStrategy.html#scipy.optimize.HessianUpdateStrategy),
  which provides an interface for specifying an approximate Hessian for use in
  quasi-Newton methods, along with two implementations
  [`BFGS`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.BFGS.html#scipy.optimize.BFGS)
  and
  [`SR1`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.SR1.html#scipy.optimize.SR1).

### Problems

::::challenge{id=line-search-problems title="Line Search Problems" }

1. Program the steepest descent and Newton algorithms using the backtracking line
   search. Use them to minimize the [Rosenbrock
   function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosenbrock_function). Set the initial step
   length $\alpha_0 = 1$ and print the step length used by each method at each
   iteration. First try the initial point $x_0 = (1.2, 1.2)^T$ and then the more
   difficult starting point $x_0 = (−1.2, 1)^T$.
2. Plot the function surface using `matplotlib` and overlay the line search segments so
   you can visualise the progress of your algorithm. Observe the difference between
   the algorithms when the gradient of the rosenbrock function is low (i.e. at the
   bottom of the curved valley)
3. Repeat (1) and (2) above using the line search implemented in Scipy
   [`scipy.optimize.line_search`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.line_search.html),
   which uses the strong Wolfe conditions.

:::solution

```python
import numpy as np
from matplotlib import cm
import scipy.optimize
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt

def steepest_descent(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f):
    return -grad_f(x)

def newton(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f):
    A = hessian_f(x)
    return -np.linalg.solve(A, grad_f(x))

def backtracking(f, grad_f, x, p):
    alpha = 1.0
    c = 1e-4
    rho = 0.5
    f_x = f(x)
    c_grad_f_x_p = c*grad_f(x).dot(p)
    while f(x + alpha*p) > f_x + alpha * c_grad_f_x_p:
        alpha = rho * alpha
    return alpha

def scipy_line_search(f, grad_f, x, p):
    return scipy.optimize.line_search(f, grad_f, x, p)[0]

def minimise(f, grad_f, hessian_f, x0, tol=1e-5, max_iter=1000, search_direction=steepest_descent, line_search=backtracking):
    x = np.copy(x0)
    alpha = 1.0
    p = np.zeros_like(x)
    p[0] = 1.
    i = 0
    array_x = np.empty((max_iter+1, len(x)), dtype=float)
    array_alpha = np.empty(max_iter, dtype=float)
    array_x[0, :] = x
    while np.linalg.norm(alpha * p) > tol and i < max_iter:
        p = search_direction(x, f, grad_f, hessian_f)
        alpha = line_search(f, grad_f, x, p)
        x += alpha * p
        array_x[i+1, :] = x
        array_alpha[i] = alpha
        i += 1
    return array_x[:i,:], array_alpha[:i]

def rosenbrock(x, y):
    return (1 - x)**2 + (y - x**2)**2

def rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return (1 - x[0])**2 + (x[1] - x[0]**2)**2

def grad_rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return np.array([
        4*x[0] * (x[0]**2 - x[1]) + 2*x[0] - 2,
        -2*x[0]**2 + 2*x[1]
    ])

def hessian_rosenbrock_2d(x):
    return np.array([
        [12 * x[0]**2 - 4*x[1] + 2, -4*x[0]],
        [-4*x[0], 2],
    ])

# verify grad and hessian using finite differences
h = 1e-5
x0 = np.array([0., 0.])
x0_x = np.array([h, 0.])
x0_y = np.array([0., h])
fd_grad_rosenbrock = np.array([
    (rosenbrock_2d(x0_x) - rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
    (rosenbrock_2d(x0_y) - rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
])
np.testing.assert_almost_equal(fd_grad_rosenbrock, grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0), decimal=4)
fd_hessian_rosenbrock = np.vstack((
    (grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0_x) - grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
    (grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0_y) - grad_rosenbrock_2d(x0)) / h,
))
np.testing.assert_almost_equal(fd_hessian_rosenbrock, hessian_rosenbrock_2d(x0),
                               decimal=4)

# plot rosenbrock surface
x = np.linspace(-1.5, 2.0, 100)
y = np.linspace(0.2, 3.0, 100)
X, Y = np.meshgrid(x, y)
Z = np.vectorize(rosenbrock)(X, Y)

fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.gca(projection='3d')
fig2 = plt.figure()
ax2 = fig2.add_subplot(1,1,1)

surf = ax.plot_surface(X, Y, Z, alpha=0.5, cmap=cm.coolwarm)

# pick two initial starting points
x01 = np.array([1.2, 1.2])
x02 = np.array([-1.2, 1])

# run all methods and plot results
for x0 in [x01, x02]:
    for p_method in [steepest_descent, newton]:
        for ls_method in [backtracking, scipy_line_search]:
            label = '{}-{}'.format(p_method.__name__, ls_method.__name__)
            pos, alpha = \
                minimise(rosenbrock_2d, grad_rosenbrock_2d, hessian_rosenbrock_2d, x0,
                         search_direction=p_method, line_search=ls_method)
            print('method', label, 'finished in', len(alpha), 'iterations')
            xs = pos[:, 0]
            ys = pos[:, 1]
            ax.plot(xs, ys, rosenbrock(xs, ys), label=label, linewidth=2)
            ax2.plot(alpha, label=label)
ax2.legend()
plt.show()
```

:::
::::
