high_performance_computing/hpc_openmp/02_intro_openmp.md, before:

---
name: Introduction to OpenMP
dependsOn: [high_performance_computing.hpc_openmp.01_intro_parallelisation]
tags: [parallelisation, OMP]
---

## What is OpenMP?

OpenMP is an industry-standard API specifically designed for parallel programming in shared memory environments. It supports programming in languages such as C, C++, and Fortran. OpenMP is an open source, industry-wide initiative that benefits from collaboration among hardware and software vendors, governed by the OpenMP Architecture Review Board ([OpenMP ARB](https://www.openmp.org/)).

::::challenge{title="An OpenMP Timeline"}

![OpenMP-history](fig/OpenMP_Timeline.png)

The timeline provides an overview of OpenMP's evolution until 2014, with significant advancements 
occurring thereafter. Notably, OpenMP 5.0 marked a significant step in 2018, followed by the latest 
iteration, OpenMP 5.2, which was released in November 2021.
::::

## How does it work? 

OpenMP allows programmers to identify and parallelize sections of code, enabling multiple threads to execute them concurrently. This concurrency is achieved using a shared-memory model, where all threads can access a common memory space and communicate through shared variables.

To understand how OpenMP orchestrates this parallel execution, let's explore the **fork-join model** it employs. Think of your program as a team with a leader (the master thread) and workers (the slave threads). When your program starts, the leader thread takes the lead. It identifies parts of the code that can be done at the same time and marks them. These marked parts are like tasks to be completed by the workers. The leader then gathers a group of helper threads, and each helper tackles one of these marked tasks. Each worker thread works independently, taking care of its task. Once all the workers are done, they come back to the leader, and the leader continues with the rest of the program.

In simpler terms, when your program finds a special "parallel" section, it's like the leader telling the workers to split up and work on different tasks together (that's the "fork" part). After finishing their tasks, these workers come back to the leader, allowing the leader to move forward (that's the "join" part). This teamwork approach helps OpenMP speed up tasks and get things done faster.

![How OMP works?](fig/fork-join.png)

OpenMP consists of three key components that enable parallel programming using threads:

- **Compiler directives:** OpenMP makes use of special code markers known as *compiler directives* to indicate to the compiler when and how to parallelise various sections of code. These directives are prefixed with `#pragma omp`, and mark sections of code to be executed concurrently by multiple threads.
- **Runtime Library Routines:** These are predefined functions provided by the OpenMP runtime library. They allow you to control the behavior of threads, manage synchronization, and handle parallel execution. For example, we can use the function `omp_get_thread_num()` to obtain the unique identifier of the calling thread.
- **Environment Variables:** These are settings that can be adjusted to influence the behavior of the OpenMP runtime. They provide a way to fine-tune the parallel execution of your program. Setting OpenMP environment variables is typically done similarly to other environment variables for your system. For instance, you can adjust the number of threads to use for a program you are about to execute by specifying the value in the `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environment variable.


## Running a Code with OpenMP

Before we delve into specifics of writing code that uses OpenMP, let's first look at how we compile and run an example "Hello World!" OpenMP program that prints this to the console.
Save the following code in `hello_world_omp.c`:

~~~c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <omp.h>

int main() {
    #pragma omp parallel
    {
        printf("Hello World!\n");
    }
}
~~~

You'll want to compile it using a standard compiler such as `gcc`. To enable the creation of multi-threaded code based on OpenMP directives, pass the `-fopenmp` flag to the compiler. This flag indicates that you're compiling an OpenMP program:

~~~bash
gcc hello_world_omp.c -o hello_world_omp -fopenmp
~~~

Before we run the code we also need to indicate how many threads we wish the program to use.
One way to do this is to specify this using the `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environment variable, e.g.

~~~bash
export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4
~~~

Now you can run it just like any other program using the following command:

~~~bash
./hello_world_omp
~~~

When you execute the OpenMP program,
it will display 'Hello World!' multiple times according to the value we entered in `OMP_NUM_THREADS`,
with each thread in the parallel region executing the `printf` statement concurrently:

~~~
Hello World!
Hello World!
Hello World!
Hello World!
~~~

## OpenMP vs. Low-Level Threading APIs (POSIX Threads)

When it comes to parallel programming with threads, there are two main ways to tackle it: the 
user-friendly OpenMP and the more intricate Low-Level Threading APIs. In this context, **Low-Level 
Threading APIs**, refer to interfaces like the Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX), which 
defines a set of standard functions and interfaces for interacting with operating systems. Each 
approach has its own advantages and considerations, so let's break them down in simpler terms:

OpenMP serves as a gentle introduction to parallel programming. It offers an easy way to parallelize 
your code without delving into complex technicalities. This makes it ideal for beginners or anyone 
seeking a straightforward approach. It's like choosing a reliable car that gets you from point A to 
point B comfortably. 

### Advantages of OpenMP:

- ***User-Friendly:*** OpenMP requires minimal code adjustments, making it a friendly choice for 
 newcomers.
- ***Automated Work Distribution:*** It divides tasks among threads, ensuring balanced workloads.
- ***Wider Applicability:*** OpenMP functions across different systems and programming languages.

For instance, consider a scenario where you have a task that involves doing the same thing over and 
over again, like processing a bunch of images. With OpenMP, you can split up the work among different 
threads, so they each handle a part of the task at the same time.

Now, imagine you're a master chef who wants complete control over every ingredient and spice in a 
recipe. That's what Low-Level Threading APIs, like POSIX, offer – a lot of control over threads and 
how they work together. But this kind of control requires a bit more knowledge and effort.

Benefits of Low-Level Threading APIs:

- ***Full Control:*** These APIs allow you to customize every aspect of threads, but it requires a 
deeper understanding.
- ***Better Performance:*** If you know exactly what you're doing, you can make things run faster and 
more efficiently.
- ***Flexible Solutions:*** You can create solutions that perfectly match your unique needs.

Let's say you're building a game where players from different parts of the world can interact with 
each other in real-time. Here, using POSIX threading would give you the control you need to manage 
these interactions smoothly and avoid any weird glitches.

### Choosing the Right Framework

When deciding between OpenMP and Low-Level Threading APIs like POSIX for your parallel programming 
needs, several factors come into play:

| Aspect                  | OpenMP                                   | Low-Level Threading APIs like POSIX                    |
 |-------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ease of Use**             | User-friendly, higher-level abstractions | Lower-level, more manual management of threads       |
| **Parallelism Scope**       | Parallel regions, loops, tasks            | Usually limited to thread creation and synchronization |
| **Portability**             | Portable across different systems        | Depends on system-specific implementation           |
| **Abstraction Level**       | Higher-level constructs and directives   | Direct interaction with system-level threading       |
| **GPU Offloading Support**  | Supports offloading work to GPUs         | Typically lacks built-in support for GPU offloading  |
| **Maintenance Complexity**  | Easier maintenance due to higher abstractions | Requires more low-level management                |
| **Performance Optimization** | May offer automatic optimization         | Requires manual tuning for performance               |
| **Common Usage**            | Widely used in research and industry      | Less common due to lower-level complexities         |

In summary, OpenMP offers a more user-friendly and productive experience, especially for researchers 
who want to focus on problem-solving rather than thread management. Additionally, its support for GPU #
offloading enhances performance in certain scenarios. On the other hand, Low-Level Threading APIs like 
POSIX provide greater control and are suitable for those with a solid grasp of system-level 
programming.

Commit message:

Review/revisions to Mehtap's porting work, hook into revised parallelisation intro

high_performance_computing/hpc_openmp/02_intro_openmp.md, after:

---
name: Introduction to OpenMP
dependsOn: []
tags: [parallelisation, OMP]
---

## What is OpenMP?

OpenMP is an industry-standard API specifically designed for parallel programming in shared memory environments. It supports programming in languages such as C, C++, and Fortran. OpenMP is an open source, industry-wide initiative that benefits from collaboration among hardware and software vendors, governed by the OpenMP Architecture Review Board ([OpenMP ARB](https://www.openmp.org/)).

::::challenge{title="An OpenMP Timeline"}

If you're interested, there's a [timeline of how OpenMP developed](https://www.openmp.org/uncategorized/openmp-timeline/).
It provides an overview of OpenMP's evolution until 2014, with significant advancements 
occurring thereafter. Notably, OpenMP 5.0 marked a significant step in 2018, followed by the latest 
iteration, OpenMP 5.2, which was released in November 2021.
::::

## How does it work? 

OpenMP allows programmers to identify and parallelize sections of code, enabling multiple threads to execute them concurrently. This concurrency is achieved using a shared-memory model, where all threads can access a common memory space and communicate through shared variables.

To understand how OpenMP orchestrates this parallel execution, let's explore the **fork-join model** it employs. Think of your program as a team with a leader (the master thread) and workers (the slave threads). When your program starts, the leader thread takes the lead. It identifies parts of the code that can be done at the same time and marks them. These marked parts are like tasks to be completed by the workers. The leader then gathers a group of helper threads, and each helper tackles one of these marked tasks. Each worker thread works independently, taking care of its task. Once all the workers are done, they come back to the leader, and the leader continues with the rest of the program.

In simpler terms, when your program finds a special "parallel" section, it's like the leader telling the workers to split up and work on different tasks together (that's the "fork" part). After finishing their tasks, these workers come back to the leader, allowing the leader to move forward (that's the "join" part). This teamwork approach helps OpenMP speed up tasks and get things done faster.

![How OMP works?](fig/fork-join.png)

OpenMP consists of three key components that enable parallel programming using threads:

- **Compiler directives:** OpenMP makes use of special code markers known as *compiler directives* to indicate to the compiler when and how to parallelise various sections of code. These directives are prefixed with `#pragma omp`, and mark sections of code to be executed concurrently by multiple threads.
- **Runtime Library Routines:** These are predefined functions provided by the OpenMP runtime library. They allow you to control the behavior of threads, manage synchronization, and handle parallel execution. For example, we can use the function `omp_get_thread_num()` to obtain the unique identifier of the calling thread.
- **Environment Variables:** These are settings that can be adjusted to influence the behavior of the OpenMP runtime. They provide a way to fine-tune the parallel execution of your program. Setting OpenMP environment variables is typically done similarly to other environment variables for your system. For instance, you can adjust the number of threads to use for a program you are about to execute by specifying the value in the `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environment variable.


## Running a Code with OpenMP

Before we delve into specifics of writing code that uses OpenMP, let's first look at how we compile and run an example "Hello World!" OpenMP program that prints this to the console.

 First, log into whichever HPC system you have access to - this could be a group server, or university- or national-level cluster (e.g. Iridis or DiRAC). Alternatively, you may have OpenMP installed on your local machine.
 
Save the following code in `hello_world_omp.c`:

~~~c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <omp.h>

int main() {
    #pragma omp parallel
    {
        printf("Hello World!\n");
    }
}
~~~

You'll likely want to compile it using a standard compiler such as `gcc`, although this may depend on your system. To enable the creation of multi-threaded code based on OpenMP directives, pass the `-fopenmp` flag to the compiler. This flag indicates that you're compiling an OpenMP program:

~~~bash
gcc hello_world_omp.c -o hello_world_omp -fopenmp
~~~

Before we run the code we also need to indicate how many threads we wish the program to use.
One way to do this is to specify this using the `OMP_NUM_THREADS` environment variable, e.g.

~~~bash
export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4
~~~

Now you can run it just like any other program using the following command:

~~~bash
./hello_world_omp
~~~

When you execute the OpenMP program,
it will display 'Hello World!' multiple times according to the value we entered in `OMP_NUM_THREADS`,
with each thread in the parallel region executing the `printf` statement concurrently:

~~~
Hello World!
Hello World!
Hello World!
Hello World!
~~~

## OpenMP vs. Low-Level Threading APIs (POSIX Threads)

When it comes to parallel programming with threads, there are two main ways to tackle it: the 
user-friendly OpenMP and the more intricate Low-Level Threading APIs. In this context, **Low-Level 
Threading APIs**, refer to interfaces like the Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX), which 
defines a set of standard functions and interfaces for interacting with operating systems. Each 
approach has its own advantages and considerations, so let's break them down in simpler terms:

OpenMP serves as a gentle introduction to parallel programming. It offers an easy way to parallelize 
your code without delving into complex technicalities. This makes it ideal for beginners or anyone 
seeking a straightforward approach. It's like choosing a reliable car that gets you from point A to 
point B comfortably. 

### Advantages of OpenMP:

- ***User-Friendly:*** OpenMP requires minimal code adjustments, making it a friendly choice for 
 newcomers.
- ***Automated Work Distribution:*** It divides tasks among threads, ensuring balanced workloads.
- ***Wider Applicability:*** OpenMP functions across different systems and programming languages.

For instance, consider a scenario where you have a task that involves doing the same thing over and 
over again, like processing a bunch of images. With OpenMP, you can split up the work among different 
threads, so they each handle a part of the task at the same time.

Now, imagine you're a master chef who wants complete control over every ingredient and spice in a 
recipe. That's what Low-Level Threading APIs, like POSIX, offer – a lot of control over threads and 
how they work together. But this kind of control requires a bit more knowledge and effort.

Benefits of Low-Level Threading APIs:

- ***Full Control:*** These APIs allow you to customize every aspect of threads, but it requires a 
deeper understanding.
- ***Better Performance:*** If you know exactly what you're doing, you can make things run faster and 
more efficiently.
- ***Flexible Solutions:*** You can create solutions that perfectly match your unique needs.

Let's say you're building a game where players from different parts of the world can interact with 
each other in real-time. Here, using POSIX threading would give you the control you need to manage 
these interactions smoothly and avoid any weird glitches.

### Choosing the Right Framework

When deciding between OpenMP and Low-Level Threading APIs like POSIX for your parallel programming 
needs, several factors come into play:

| Aspect                  | OpenMP                                   | Low-Level Threading APIs like POSIX                    |
 |-------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ease of Use**             | User-friendly, higher-level abstractions | Lower-level, more manual management of threads       |
| **Parallelism Scope**       | Parallel regions, loops, tasks            | Usually limited to thread creation and synchronization |
| **Portability**             | Portable across different systems        | Depends on system-specific implementation           |
| **Abstraction Level**       | Higher-level constructs and directives   | Direct interaction with system-level threading       |
| **GPU Offloading Support**  | Supports offloading work to GPUs         | Typically lacks built-in support for GPU offloading  |
| **Maintenance Complexity**  | Easier maintenance due to higher abstractions | Requires more low-level management                |
| **Performance Optimization** | May offer automatic optimization         | Requires manual tuning for performance               |
| **Common Usage**            | Widely used in research and industry      | Less common due to lower-level complexities         |

In summary, OpenMP offers a more user-friendly and productive experience, especially for researchers 
who want to focus on problem-solving rather than thread management. Additionally, its support for GPU #
offloading enhances performance in certain scenarios. On the other hand, Low-Level Threading APIs like 
POSIX provide greater control and are suitable for those with a solid grasp of system-level 
programming.
