technology_and_tooling/best_practices/linters_python.md, before:

---
name: Linters
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.best_practices.code_style_python]
tags: [python]
---

:::callout
This material was edited from the original in "Intermediate Research Software
Development Skills" hosted by the Software Carpentries"
:::

## Verifying Code Style Using Linters

We've seen how we can use PyCharm to help us format our Python code in a consistent style.
This aids reusability, since consistent-looking code is easier to modify since it's easier to read and understand
if it's consistent. We can also use tools to identify consistency issues in a report-style too,
using [**code linters**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_%28software%29).
Linters analyse source code to identify and report on stylistic and even programming errors. Let's look at a very well
used one of these called `pylint`.

First, let's ensure we are on the `style-fixes` branch once again.

```bash
git checkout style-fixes
```

Pylint is just a Python package so we can install it in our virtual environment using:

```bash
pip3 install pylint
pylint --version
```

We should see the version of Pylint, something like:

```text
pylint 2.13.3
...
```

We should also update our `requirements.txt` with this new addition:

```bash
pip3 freeze > requirements.txt
```

Pylint is a command-line tool that can help our code in many ways:

- **Check PEP8 compliance:** whilst in-IDE context-sensitive highlighting such as that provided via PyCharm helps us stay consistent with PEP8 as we write code, this tool provides a full report
- **Perform basic error detection:** Pylint can look for certain Python type errors
- **Check variable naming conventions**: Pylint often goes beyond PEP8 to include other common conventions, such as naming variables outside of functions in upper case
- **Customisation**: you can specify which errors and conventions you wish to check for, and those you wish to ignore

Pylint can also identify **code smells**.

:::callout

## How Does Code Smell?

There are many ways that code can exhibit bad design whilst not breaking any rules and working correctly. A _code smell_ is a characteristic that indicates that there is an underlying problem with source code, e.g. large classes or methods, methods with too many parameters, duplicated statements in both if and else blocks of conditionals, etc. They aren't functional errors in the code, but rather are certain structures that violate principles of good design and impact design quality. They can also indicate that code is in need of maintenance and refactoring.

The phrase has its origins in Chapter 3 "Bad smells in code" by Kent Beck and Martin Fowler in [Fowler, Martin (1999). Refactoring. Improving the Design of Existing Code. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-48567-2](https://www.amazon.com/Refactoring-Improving-Design-Existing-Code/dp/0201485672/).
:::

Pylint recommendations are given as warnings or errors, and Pylint also scores the code with an overall mark.
We can look at a specific file (e.g. `inflammation-analysis.py`), or a module
(e.g. `inflammation`). Let's look at our `inflammation` module and code inside it (namely `models.py` and `views.py`).
From the project root do:

```bash
pylint inflammation
```

You should see an output similar to the following:

```text
************* Module inflammation.models
inflammation/models.py:5:82: C0303: Trailing whitespace (trailing-whitespace)
inflammation/models.py:6:66: C0303: Trailing whitespace (trailing-whitespace)
inflammation/models.py:34:0: C0305: Trailing newlines (trailing-newlines)
************* Module inflammation.views
inflammation/views.py:4:0: W0611: Unused numpy imported as np (unused-import)

------------------------------------------------------------------
Your code has been rated at 8.00/10 (previous run: 8.00/10, +0.00)
```

Your own outputs of the above commands may vary depending on how you have implemented and fixed the code in
previous exercises and the coding style you have used.

The five digit codes, such as `C0303`, are unique identifiers for warnings, with the first character indicating
the type of warning. There are five different types of warnings that Pylint looks for, and you can get a summary of
them by doing:

```bash
pylint --long-help
```

Near the end you'll see:

```text
  Output:
    Using the default text output, the message format is :
    MESSAGE_TYPE: LINE_NUM:[OBJECT:] MESSAGE
    There are 5 kind of message types :
    * (C) convention, for programming standard violation
    * (R) refactor, for bad code smell
    * (W) warning, for python specific problems
    * (E) error, for probable bugs in the code
    * (F) fatal, if an error occurred which prevented pylint from doing
    further processing.
```

So for an example of a Pylint Python-specific `warning`, see the "W0611: Unused numpy imported
as np (unused-import)" warning.

It is important to note that while tools such as Pylint are great at giving you a starting point to consider how to
improve your code, they won't find everything that may be wrong with it.

:::callout

## How Does Pylint Calculate the Score?

The Python formula used is (with the variables representing numbers of each type of infraction and `statement` indicating the total number of statements):

```python nolint
10.0 - ((float(5 * error + warning + refactor + convention) / statement) * 10)
```

:::

For example, with a total of 31 statements of models.py and views.py, with a count of the errors shown above, we get
a score of 8.00. Note whilst there is a maximum score of 10, given the formula, there is no minimum score - it's quite possible to get a negative score!

::::challenge{id=further-improve-code-style title="Further Improve Code Style of Our
Project"}
Select and fix a few of the issues with our code that Pylint detected. Make sure you do not break the rest of the
code in the process and that the code still runs. After making any changes, run Pylint again to verify you've
resolved these issues.

Make sure you commit and push `requirements.txt` and any file with further code style improvements you did and
merge onto your development and main branches.

```bash
git add requirements.txt
git commit -m "Added Pylint library"
git push origin style-fixes
git checkout develop
git merge style-fixes
git push origin develop
git checkout main
git merge develop
git push origin main
```

::::

::::challenge{id=improve-code-style-other title="Improve Code Style of Your Other
Python Projects"}
If you have a Python project you are working on or you worked on in the past, run it past Pylint to see what issues
with your code are detected, if any.
::::

It is possible to automate these kind of code checks with GitHub's Continuous Integration service GitHub Actions -
we will come back to automated linting in the episode on ["Diagnosing Issues and Improving Robustness"](../24-diagnosing-issues-improving-robustness/index.html).

Commit message:

added learning outcomes for technology and tooling materials

technology_and_tooling/best_practices/linters_python.md, after:

---
name: Linters
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.best_practices.code_style_python]
tags: [python]
learningOutcomes:
  - Use code linting tools to verify a program’s adherence to a Python coding style convention.
attribution:
  - citation: >
      This material was edited from the original in "Intermediate Research Software
      Development Skills" hosted by the Carpentries Incubator.
    url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/
    image: https://carpentries-incubator.org/assets/img/carpentries-incubator.svg
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

:::callout
This material was edited from the original in "Intermediate Research Software
Development Skills" hosted by the Software Carpentries
:::

## Verifying Code Style Using Linters

We've seen how we can use PyCharm to help us format our Python code in a consistent style.
This aids reusability, since consistent-looking code is easier to modify since it's easier to read and understand
if it's consistent. We can also use tools to identify consistency issues in a report-style too,
using [**code linters**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_%28software%29).
Linters analyse source code to identify and report on stylistic and even programming errors. Let's look at a very well
used one of these called `pylint`.

First, let's ensure we are on the `style-fixes` branch once again.

```bash
git checkout style-fixes
```

Pylint is just a Python package so we can install it in our virtual environment using:

```bash
pip3 install pylint
pylint --version
```

We should see the version of Pylint, something like:

```text
pylint 2.13.3
...
```

We should also update our `requirements.txt` with this new addition:

```bash
pip3 freeze > requirements.txt
```

Pylint is a command-line tool that can help our code in many ways:

- **Check PEP8 compliance:** whilst in-IDE context-sensitive highlighting such as that provided via PyCharm helps us stay consistent with PEP8 as we write code, this tool provides a full report
- **Perform basic error detection:** Pylint can look for certain Python type errors
- **Check variable naming conventions**: Pylint often goes beyond PEP8 to include other common conventions, such as naming variables outside of functions in upper case
- **Customisation**: you can specify which errors and conventions you wish to check for, and those you wish to ignore

Pylint can also identify **code smells**.

:::callout

## How Does Code Smell?

There are many ways that code can exhibit bad design whilst not breaking any rules and working correctly. A _code smell_ is a characteristic that indicates that there is an underlying problem with source code, e.g. large classes or methods, methods with too many parameters, duplicated statements in both if and else blocks of conditionals, etc. They aren't functional errors in the code, but rather are certain structures that violate principles of good design and impact design quality. They can also indicate that code is in need of maintenance and refactoring.

The phrase has its origins in Chapter 3 "Bad smells in code" by Kent Beck and Martin Fowler in [Fowler, Martin (1999). Refactoring. Improving the Design of Existing Code. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-48567-2](https://www.amazon.com/Refactoring-Improving-Design-Existing-Code/dp/0201485672/).
:::

Pylint recommendations are given as warnings or errors, and Pylint also scores the code with an overall mark.
We can look at a specific file (e.g. `inflammation-analysis.py`), or a module
(e.g. `inflammation`). Let's look at our `inflammation` module and code inside it (namely `models.py` and `views.py`).
From the project root do:

```bash
pylint inflammation
```

You should see an output similar to the following:

```text
************* Module inflammation.models
inflammation/models.py:5:82: C0303: Trailing whitespace (trailing-whitespace)
inflammation/models.py:6:66: C0303: Trailing whitespace (trailing-whitespace)
inflammation/models.py:34:0: C0305: Trailing newlines (trailing-newlines)
************* Module inflammation.views
inflammation/views.py:4:0: W0611: Unused numpy imported as np (unused-import)

------------------------------------------------------------------
Your code has been rated at 8.00/10 (previous run: 8.00/10, +0.00)
```

Your own outputs of the above commands may vary depending on how you have implemented and fixed the code in
previous exercises and the coding style you have used.

The five digit codes, such as `C0303`, are unique identifiers for warnings, with the first character indicating
the type of warning. There are five different types of warnings that Pylint looks for, and you can get a summary of
them by doing:

```bash
pylint --long-help
```

Near the end you'll see:

```text
  Output:
    Using the default text output, the message format is :
    MESSAGE_TYPE: LINE_NUM:[OBJECT:] MESSAGE
    There are 5 kind of message types :
    * (C) convention, for programming standard violation
    * (R) refactor, for bad code smell
    * (W) warning, for python specific problems
    * (E) error, for probable bugs in the code
    * (F) fatal, if an error occurred which prevented pylint from doing
    further processing.
```

So for an example of a Pylint Python-specific `warning`, see the "W0611: Unused numpy imported
as np (unused-import)" warning.

It is important to note that while tools such as Pylint are great at giving you a starting point to consider how to
improve your code, they won't find everything that may be wrong with it.

:::callout

## How Does Pylint Calculate the Score?

The Python formula used is (with the variables representing numbers of each type of infraction and `statement` indicating the total number of statements):

```python nolint
10.0 - ((float(5 * error + warning + refactor + convention) / statement) * 10)
```

:::

For example, with a total of 31 statements of models.py and views.py, with a count of the errors shown above, we get
a score of 8.00. Note whilst there is a maximum score of 10, given the formula, there is no minimum score - it's quite possible to get a negative score!

::::challenge{id=further-improve-code-style title="Further Improve Code Style of Our
Project"}
Select and fix a few of the issues with our code that Pylint detected. Make sure you do not break the rest of the
code in the process and that the code still runs. After making any changes, run Pylint again to verify you've
resolved these issues.

Make sure you commit and push `requirements.txt` and any file with further code style improvements you did and
merge onto your development and main branches.

```bash
git add requirements.txt
git commit -m "Added Pylint library"
git push origin style-fixes
git checkout develop
git merge style-fixes
git push origin develop
git checkout main
git merge develop
git push origin main
```

::::

::::challenge{id=improve-code-style-other title="Improve Code Style of Your Other
Python Projects"}
If you have a Python project you are working on or you worked on in the past, run it past Pylint to see what issues
with your code are detected, if any.
::::

It is possible to automate these kind of code checks with GitHub's Continuous Integration service GitHub Actions -
we will come back to automated linting in the episode on ["Diagnosing Issues and Improving Robustness"](../24-diagnosing-issues-improving-robustness/index.html).
