libraries/pybamm/03_parameter_values.md, before:

---
name: Parameter sets
dependsOn: [libraries.pybamm.02_experiments]
tags: [pybamm]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      PyBaMM documentation by the PyBaMM Team
    url: https://docs.pybamm.org
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pybamm-team/pybamm.org/main/static/images/pybamm_logo.svg
    license: BSD-3
---

## Parameter Sets

PyBaMM comes with 12 ready-made parameter sets for lithium-ion batteries. To select one, pass the name of one of them as an input argument to the `ParameterValues` class. For now, select `Marquis2019`, which is the default parameter set for lithium-ion models.

```python
import pybamm
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
model = pybamm.lithium_ion.DFN()
```

There are over 100 parameter values! Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries so you can look up the parameters you're interested in:

```python
print(parameter_values["Upper voltage cut-off [V]"])
print(parameter_values["Lower voltage cut-off [V]"])
```

Recall `experiment3` from the morning session:

```python
experiment3 = pybamm.Experiment(
    # Initialize
    [
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",
        "Rest for 4 hours",
    ]
    # Capacity check
    + [(
        "Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100"
    )]
    # Ageing cycles

    + [(
        "Discharge at 1C until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at 0.3C until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",
    )] * 10 +
    # Capacity check
    + [(
        "Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100"
    )]
)
```

The above `experiment3` will not work with the default parameters, because it was designed for a different cell with different voltage limits. Marquis et al. studied the Kokam SLPB78205130H 16 Ah prismatic cell, whereas `experiment3` is designed for the LG M50 5 Ah cylindrical cell. Four of PyBaMM's built-in parameter sets correspond to the LG M50:

- `Chen2020` comes from the first study, published in 2020.
- `Chen2020_composite` is an upgrade of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's composite electrode model
- `OKane2022` is a superset of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's various degradation models
- `ORegan2022` comes from a follow-up paper to `Chen2020` that addressed some questions the first paper didn't answer

Like `Experiment` objects, `ParameterValues` objects are an optional argument to the `Simulation` class:

```python
simulation3 = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    experiment=experiment3,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
```

If you use suitable parameter values, the simulation will run, but the results won't be very interesting. Try changing the model options to enable one or more degradation mechanisms. [This example notebook](https://docs.pybamm.org/en/latest/source/examples/notebooks/models/coupled-degradation.html) shows you how to do this, and how to interpret the results. However, 10 cycles isn't enough for the battery to degrade very much. Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries and can therefore be updated easily:

```python
parameter_values.update({
    "Outer SEI solvent diffusivity [m2.s-1]": 1.25e-20,
    "Lithium plating kinetic rate constant [m.s-1]": 1e-8,
    "Dead lithium decay constant [s-1]": 4e-6,
    "Negative electrode cracking rate": 1.95e-18,
    "Negative electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
    "Positive electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
})
```

The updated parameter values will lead to faster degradation.

You can also create, import and use your own parameter sets:

```python
from your_parameter_set import get_parameter_values
parameter_values = get_parameter_values()
```

::::challenge{id=dot_product title="Create your own parameter set!"}

Try creating your own parameter set and running a simulation with it! Take one of PyBaMM's existing parameter sets and change some of the function parameters to make it your own!

::::

## Input parameters

Pybamm's parameter sets contain all the parameters needed to run a simulation,
but often you want to see how the solution changes with respect to a single
parameter or a small subset of parameters. Of course, you could create a new
parameter set with the desired parameters changed, like so:

```python
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": 2,
})
```

You would then need to create a new `Simulation` object with the updated parameter values.

```python
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
```

This is a lot of extra overhead for changing a single parameter, as the
simulation needs to be recreated from scratch. Instead, you can use an input
parameter, which tells the simulation that this parameter does not yet have a
specific value, but one will be provided when the model is solved.

An input parameter can be created by setting its value to the string `[input]`, like so:

```python
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": "[input]",
})
```

When the model is solved, you can provide a value for the input parameter

```python
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
solution = simulation.solve([0, 3600], inputs={"Current function [A]": 2})
```

::::challenge{id=input_parameters title="Input parameters"}

Try creating a new parameter set with an input parameter, and then solve the
model with a value for the input parameter. Vary the value of the input
parameter and see how the solution changes.

:::callout

Hint: To plot multiple solutions, you can pass a list of solutions to `pybamm.dynamic_plot`

:::

:::solution

```python
model = pybamm.lithium_ion.DFN()
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": "[input]",
})
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)

solutions = []
labels = []
for value in [1, 2, 3]:
    solution = simulation.solve([0, 3600], inputs={"Current function [A]": value})
    solutions.append(solution)
    labels.append(f"Current function [A] = {value}")

pybamm.dynamic_plot(solutions, labels=labels)
```

:::
::::

Commit message:

#182 added learning outcomes to the parameter sets chapter

libraries/pybamm/03_parameter_values.md, after:

---
name: Parameter sets
dependsOn: [libraries.pybamm.02_experiments]
tags: [pybamm]
learningOutcomes:
  - Understand how to explore and use PyBaMM's built-in parameter sets
  - Be able to change values in existing parameter sets
  - Be able to create and use your own parameter sets
attribution:
  - citation: >
      PyBaMM documentation by the PyBaMM Team
    url: https://docs.pybamm.org
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pybamm-team/pybamm.org/main/static/images/pybamm_logo.svg
    license: BSD-3
---

## Parameter Sets

PyBaMM comes with 12 ready-made parameter sets for lithium-ion batteries. To select one, pass the name of one of them as an input argument to the `ParameterValues` class. For now, select `Marquis2019`, which is the default parameter set for lithium-ion models.

```python
import pybamm
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
model = pybamm.lithium_ion.DFN()
```

There are over 100 parameter values! Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries so you can look up the parameters you're interested in:

```python
print(parameter_values["Upper voltage cut-off [V]"])
print(parameter_values["Lower voltage cut-off [V]"])
```

Recall `experiment3` from the morning session:

```python
experiment3 = pybamm.Experiment(
    # Initialize
    [
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",
        "Rest for 4 hours",
    ]
    # Capacity check
    + [(
        "Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100"
    )]
    # Ageing cycles

    + [(
        "Discharge at 1C until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at 0.3C until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",
    )] * 10 +
    # Capacity check
    + [(
        "Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V",
        "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V",
        "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100"
    )]
)
```

The above `experiment3` will not work with the default parameters, because it was designed for a different cell with different voltage limits. Marquis et al. studied the Kokam SLPB78205130H 16 Ah prismatic cell, whereas `experiment3` is designed for the LG M50 5 Ah cylindrical cell. Four of PyBaMM's built-in parameter sets correspond to the LG M50:

- `Chen2020` comes from the first study, published in 2020.
- `Chen2020_composite` is an upgrade of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's composite electrode model
- `OKane2022` is a superset of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's various degradation models
- `ORegan2022` comes from a follow-up paper to `Chen2020` that addressed some questions the first paper didn't answer

Like `Experiment` objects, `ParameterValues` objects are an optional argument to the `Simulation` class:

```python
simulation3 = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    experiment=experiment3,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
```

If you use suitable parameter values, the simulation will run, but the results won't be very interesting. Try changing the model options to enable one or more degradation mechanisms. [This example notebook](https://docs.pybamm.org/en/latest/source/examples/notebooks/models/coupled-degradation.html) shows you how to do this, and how to interpret the results. However, 10 cycles isn't enough for the battery to degrade very much. Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries and can therefore be updated easily:

```python
parameter_values.update({
    "Outer SEI solvent diffusivity [m2.s-1]": 1.25e-20,
    "Lithium plating kinetic rate constant [m.s-1]": 1e-8,
    "Dead lithium decay constant [s-1]": 4e-6,
    "Negative electrode cracking rate": 1.95e-18,
    "Negative electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
    "Positive electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
})
```

The updated parameter values will lead to faster degradation.

You can also create, import and use your own parameter sets:

```python
from your_parameter_set import get_parameter_values
parameter_values = get_parameter_values()
```

::::challenge{id=dot_product title="Create your own parameter set!"}

Try creating your own parameter set and running a simulation with it! Take one of PyBaMM's existing parameter sets and change some of the function parameters to make it your own!

::::

## Input parameters

Pybamm's parameter sets contain all the parameters needed to run a simulation,
but often you want to see how the solution changes with respect to a single
parameter or a small subset of parameters. Of course, you could create a new
parameter set with the desired parameters changed, like so:

```python
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": 2,
})
```

You would then need to create a new `Simulation` object with the updated parameter values.

```python
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
```

This is a lot of extra overhead for changing a single parameter, as the
simulation needs to be recreated from scratch. Instead, you can use an input
parameter, which tells the simulation that this parameter does not yet have a
specific value, but one will be provided when the model is solved.

An input parameter can be created by setting its value to the string `[input]`, like so:

```python
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": "[input]",
})
```

When the model is solved, you can provide a value for the input parameter

```python
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)
solution = simulation.solve([0, 3600], inputs={"Current function [A]": 2})
```

::::challenge{id=input_parameters title="Input parameters"}

Try creating a new parameter set with an input parameter, and then solve the
model with a value for the input parameter. Vary the value of the input
parameter and see how the solution changes.

:::callout

Hint: To plot multiple solutions, you can pass a list of solutions to `pybamm.dynamic_plot`

:::

:::solution

```python
model = pybamm.lithium_ion.DFN()
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
parameter_values.update({
    "Current function [A]": "[input]",
})
simulation = pybamm.Simulation(
    model,
    parameter_values=parameter_values
)

solutions = []
labels = []
for value in [1, 2, 3]:
    solution = simulation.solve([0, 3600], inputs={"Current function [A]": value})
    solutions.append(solution)
    labels.append(f"Current function [A] = {value}")

pybamm.dynamic_plot(solutions, labels=labels)
```

:::
::::
