libraries/pybamm/Parameter_sets.md, before:

---
name: Parameter sets
dependsOn: [
]
tags: [pybamm]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        PyBaMM documentation by the PyBaMM Team
      url: https://docs.pybamm.org
      image: https://github.com/pybamm-team/pybamm.org/blob/main/static/images/pybamm_logo.svg
      license: BSD-3
---

PyBaMM comes with 12 ready-made parameter sets for lithium-ion batteries. To select one, pass the name of one of them as an input argument to the `ParameterValues` class. For now, select `Marquis2019`, which is the default parameter set for lithium-ion models.

```
import pybamm
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
```

There are over 100 parameter values! Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries so you can look up the parameters you're interested in:

```
print(parameter_values["Upper voltage cut-off [V]"])
print(parameter_values["Lower voltage cut-off [V]"])
```

Recall the experiment that gave you an error when you tried to run it:

```
experiment3 = pybamm.Experiment(
    ["Hold at 4.2 V until C/100", "Rest for 4 hours",] +  # Initialize
    [("Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V", "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100")] +  # Capacity check
    [("Discharge at 1C until 2.5 V", "Charge at 0.3C until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",)] * 10 +  # Ageing cycles
    [("Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V", "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100")]  # Capacity check
)
```

The above `experiment3` was designed for a different cell. Marquis et al. studied the Kokam SLPB78205130H 16 Ah prismatic cell, whereas `experiment3` is designed for the LG M50 5 Ah cylindrical cell. Four of PyBaMM's built-in parameter sets correspond to the LG M50:
* `Chen2020` comes from the first study, published in 2020.
* `Chen2020_composite` is an upgrade of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's composite electrode model
* `OKane2022` is a superset of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's various degradation models
* `ORegan2022` comes from a follow-up paper to `Chen2020` that addressed some questions the first paper didn't answer

Like `Experiment` objects, `ParameterValues` objects are an optional argument to the `Simulation` class:

```
simulation3 = pybamm.Simulation(model, experiment=experiment3, parameter_values=parameter_values)
```

With updated parameter values, the simulation will now run, but the results won't be very interesting. Try changing the model options to enable one or more degradation mechanisms. [This example notebook](https://docs.pybamm.org/en/latest/source/examples/notebooks/models/coupled-degradation.html) shows you how to do this, and how to interpret the results. However, 10 cycles isn't enough for the battery to degrade very much. Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries and can therefore be updated easily:

```
parameter_values.update({
    "Outer SEI solvent diffusivity [m2.s-1]": 1.25e-20,
    "Lithium plating kinetic rate constant [m.s-1]: 1e-8,
    "Dead lithium decay constant [s-1]: 4e-6,
    "Negative electrode cracking rate": 1.95e-18,
    "Negative electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
    "Positive electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
})
```

The updated parameter values will lead to faster degradation.

You can also create, import and use your own parameter sets:

```
from your_parameter_set import get_parameter_values
parameter_values = get_parameter_values()
```

So try creating your own parameter set and running a simulation with it! Take one of PyBaMM's existing parameter sets and change some of the function parameters to make it your own!

If you can save input parameters, how do you save simulation outputs? And what do you do with them? Find out in the next exercise.

Commit message:

Added challenge and solution blocks

libraries/pybamm/Parameter_sets.md, after:

---
name: Parameter sets
dependsOn: [
    experiments
]
tags: [pybamm]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        PyBaMM documentation by the PyBaMM Team
      url: https://docs.pybamm.org
      image: https://github.com/pybamm-team/pybamm.org/blob/main/static/images/pybamm_logo.svg
      license: BSD-3
---

PyBaMM comes with 12 ready-made parameter sets for lithium-ion batteries. To select one, pass the name of one of them as an input argument to the `ParameterValues` class. For now, select `Marquis2019`, which is the default parameter set for lithium-ion models.

```
import pybamm
parameter_values = pybamm.ParameterValues("Marquis2019")
```

There are over 100 parameter values! Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries so you can look up the parameters you're interested in:

```
print(parameter_values["Upper voltage cut-off [V]"])
print(parameter_values["Lower voltage cut-off [V]"])
```

Recall `experiment3` from the morning session:

```
experiment3 = pybamm.Experiment(
    ["Hold at 4.2 V until C/100", "Rest for 4 hours",] +  # Initialize
    [("Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V", "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100")] +  # Capacity check
    [("Discharge at 1C until 2.5 V", "Charge at 0.3C until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100",)] * 10 +  # Ageing cycles
    [("Discharge at C/10 until 2.5 V", "Charge at C/10 until 4.2 V", "Hold at 4.2 V until C/100")]  # Capacity check
)
```

The above `experiment3` will not work with the default parameters, because it was designed for a different cell. Marquis et al. studied the Kokam SLPB78205130H 16 Ah prismatic cell, whereas `experiment3` is designed for the LG M50 5 Ah cylindrical cell. Four of PyBaMM's built-in parameter sets correspond to the LG M50:
* `Chen2020` comes from the first study, published in 2020.
* `Chen2020_composite` is an upgrade of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's composite electrode model
* `OKane2022` is a superset of `Chen2020` designed to work with PyBaMM's various degradation models
* `ORegan2022` comes from a follow-up paper to `Chen2020` that addressed some questions the first paper didn't answer

Like `Experiment` objects, `ParameterValues` objects are an optional argument to the `Simulation` class:

```
simulation3 = pybamm.Simulation(model, experiment=experiment3, parameter_values=parameter_values)
```

With updated parameter values, the simulation will now run, but the results won't be very interesting. Try changing the model options to enable one or more degradation mechanisms. [This example notebook](https://docs.pybamm.org/en/latest/source/examples/notebooks/models/coupled-degradation.html) shows you how to do this, and how to interpret the results. However, 10 cycles isn't enough for the battery to degrade very much. Fortunately, `ParameterValues` objects are dictionaries and can therefore be updated easily:

```
parameter_values.update({
    "Outer SEI solvent diffusivity [m2.s-1]": 1.25e-20,
    "Lithium plating kinetic rate constant [m.s-1]: 1e-8,
    "Dead lithium decay constant [s-1]: 4e-6,
    "Negative electrode cracking rate": 1.95e-18,
    "Negative electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
    "Positive electrode LAM constant proportional term [s-1]": 5.5556e-6,
})
```

The updated parameter values will lead to faster degradation.

You can also create, import and use your own parameter sets:

```
from your_parameter_set import get_parameter_values
parameter_values = get_parameter_values()
```

::::challenge{id=dot_product title="Create your own parameter set!"}

Try creating your own parameter set and running a simulation with it! Take one of PyBaMM's existing parameter sets and change some of the function parameters to make it your own!

::::
