technology_and_tooling/testing/scaling_up.md, before:

---
name: Scaling Up Unit Testing
id: scaling_up
dependsOn: [
  technology_and_tooling.testing.automated_testing
]
tags: [pytest]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Aleksandra Nenadic, Steve Crouch, James Graham, et al. (2022). carpentries-incubator/python-intermediate-development: beta (beta). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057"
      url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
    - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1 
      url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
      image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
      license: CC-BY-4.0


---

## Introduction

We're starting to build up a number of tests that test the same function, but
just with different parameters. However, continuing to write a new function for
every single test case isn't likely to scale well as our development progresses.
How can we make our job of writing tests more efficient? And importantly, as the
number of tests increases, how can we determine how much of our code base is
actually being tested?

## Parameterising Our Unit Tests

So far, we've been writing a single function for every new test we need. But
when we simply want to use the same test code but with different data for
another test, it would be great to be able to specify multiple sets of data to
use with the same test code. Test **parameterisation** gives us this.

So instead of writing a separate function for each different test, we can
**parameterise** the tests with multiple test inputs. For example, in
`tests/test_models.py` let us rewrite the `test_daily_mean_zeros()` and
`test_daily_mean_integers()` into a single test function:

~~~python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0], [0, 0], [0, 0] ], [0, 0]),
        ([ [1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6] ], [3, 4]),
    ])
def test_daily_mean(test, expected):
    """Test mean function works for array of zeroes and positive integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_mean
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_mean(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))
~~~

Here, we use Pytest's **mark** capability to add metadata to this specific test - in this case, marking that it's a parameterised test. `parameterize()`
function is actually a [Python **decorator**](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/decorator). A
decorator, when applied to a function, adds some functionality to it when it is
called, and here, what we want to do is specify multiple input and expected
output test cases so the function is called over each of these inputs
automatically when this test is called.

We specify these as arguments to the `parameterize()` decorator, firstly
indicating the names of these arguments that will be passed to the function
(`test`, `expected`), and secondly the actual arguments themselves that
correspond to each of these names - the input data (the `test` argument), and
the expected result (the `expected` argument). In this case, we are passing in
two tests to `test_daily_mean()` which will be run sequentially.

So our first test will run `daily_mean()` on `[ [0, 0], [0, 0], [0, 0] ]` (our
`test` argument), and check to see if it equals `[0, 0]` (our `expected`
argument). Similarly, our second test will run `daily_mean()` with `[ [1, 2],
[3, 4], [5, 6] ]` and check it produces `[3, 4]`.

The big plus here is that we don't need to write separate functions for each of
the tests - our test code can remain compact and readable as we write more tests
and adding more tests scales better as our code becomes more complex.

::::challenge{id="write-parameterised-unit-tests"  title="Write Parameterised Unit Tests"}

Rewrite your test functions for `daily_max()` and `daily_min()` to be parameterised, adding in new test cases for each of them.

:::solution

~~~python
...
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0] ], [0, 0, 0]),
        ([ [4, 2, 5], [1, 6, 2], [4, 1, 9] ], [4, 6, 9]),
        ([ [4, -2, 5], [1, -6, 2], [-4, -1, 9] ], [4, -1, 9]),
    ])
def test_daily_max(test, expected):
    """Test max function works for zeroes, positive integers, mix of positive/negative integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_max
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_max(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))


@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0] ], [0, 0, 0]),
        ([ [4, 2, 5], [1, 6, 2], [4, 1, 9] ], [1, 1, 2]),
        ([ [4, -2, 5], [1, -6, 2], [-4, -1, 9] ], [-4, -6, 2]),
    ])
def test_daily_min(test, expected):
    """Test min function works for zeroes, positive integers, mix of positive/negative integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_min
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_min(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))
...
~~~

:::
::::

## Code Coverage - How Much of Our Code is Tested?

Pytest can't think of test cases for us. We still have to decide what to test
and how many tests to run. Our best guide here is economics: we want the tests
that are most likely to give us useful information that we don't already have.
For example, if `daily_mean(np.array([[2, 0], [4, 0]])))` works, there's
probably not much point testing `daily_mean(np.array([[3, 0], [4, 0]])))`, since
it's hard to think of a bug that would show up in one case but not in the other.

Now, we should try to choose tests that are as different from each other as
possible, so that we force the code we're testing to execute in all the
different ways it can - to ensure our tests have a high degree of **code
coverage**.

A simple way to check the code coverage for a set of tests is to use `pytest` to
tell us how many statements in our code are being tested. By installing a Python
package to our virtual environment called `pytest-cov` that is used by Pytest
and using that, we can find this out:

~~~bash
pip install pytest-cov
python -m pytest --cov=inflammation.models tests/test_models.py
~~~

So here, we specify the additional named argument `--cov` to `pytest` specifying the code to analyse for test coverage.

~~~text
============================= test session starts ==============================
platform darwin -- Python 3.9.6, pytest-6.2.5, py-1.11.0, pluggy-1.0.0
rootdir: /Users/alex/python-intermediate-inflammation
plugins: anyio-3.3.4, cov-3.0.0
collected 9 items                                                               

tests/test_models.py .........                                            [100%]

---------- coverage: platform darwin, python 3.9.6-final-0 -----------
Name                     Stmts   Miss  Cover
--------------------------------------------
inflammation/models.py       9      1    89%
--------------------------------------------
TOTAL                        9      1    89%

============================== 9 passed in 0.26s ===============================
~~~

Here we can see that our tests are doing very well - 89% of statements in
`inflammation/models.py` have been executed. But which statements are not being
tested? The additional argument `--cov-report term-missing` can tell us:

~~~bash
python -m pytest --cov=inflammation.models --cov-report term-missing tests/test_models.py
~~~

~~~text
...
Name                     Stmts   Miss  Cover   Missing
------------------------------------------------------
inflammation/models.py       9      1    89%   18
------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL                        9      1    89%
...
~~~

So there's still one statement not being tested at line 18, and it turns out
it's in the function `load_csv()`. Here we should consider whether or not to
write a test for this function, and, in general, any other functions that may
not be tested. Of course, if there are hundreds or thousands of lines that are
not covered it may not be feasible to write tests for them all. But we should
prioritise the ones for which we write tests, considering how often they're
used, how complex they are, and importantly, the extent to which they affect our
program's results.

:::callout

## What about Testing Against Indeterminate Output?

What if your implementation depends on a degree of random behaviour? This can be
desired within a number of applications, particularly in simulations (for
example, molecular simulations) or other stochastic behavioural models of
complex systems. So how can you test against such systems if the outputs are
different when given the same inputs?

One way is to *remove the randomness* during testing. For those portions of your
code that use a language feature or library to generate a random number, you can
instead produce a known sequence of numbers instead when testing, to make the
results deterministic and hence easier to test against. You could encapsulate
this different behaviour in separate functions, methods, or classes and call the
appropriate one depending on whether you are testing or not. This is essentially
a type of **mocking**, where you are creating a "mock" version that mimics some
behaviour for the purposes of testing.

Another way is to *control the randomness* during testing to provide results
that are deterministic - the same each time. Implementations of randomness in
computing languages, including Python, are actually never truly random - they
are **pseudorandom**: the sequence of 'random' numbers are typically generated
using a mathematical algorithm. A **seed** value is used to initialise an
implementation's random number generator, and from that point, the sequence of
numbers is actually deterministic. Many implementations just use the system time
as the default seed, but you can set your own. By doing so, the generated
sequence of numbers is the same, e.g. using Python's `random` library to
randomly select a sample of ten numbers from a sequence between 0-99:

~~~python
import random

random.seed(1)
print(random.sample(range(0, 100), 10))
random.seed(1)
print(random.sample(range(0, 100), 10))
~~~

Will produce:

~~~text
[17, 72, 97, 8, 32, 15, 63, 57, 60, 83]
[17, 72, 97, 8, 32, 15, 63, 57, 60, 83]
~~~

So since your program's randomness is essentially eliminated, your tests can be
written to test against the known output. The trick of course, is to ensure that
the output being testing against is definitively correct!

The other thing you can do while keeping the random behaviour, is to *test the
output data against expected constraints* of that output. For example, if you
know that all data should be within particular ranges, or within a particular
statistical distribution type (e.g. normal distribution over time), you can test
against that, conducting multiple test runs that take advantage of the
randomness to fill the known "space" of expected results. Note that this isn't
as precise or complete, and bear in mind this could mean you need to run *a lot*
of tests which may take considerable time.

:::

## Limits to Testing

Like any other piece of experimental apparatus, a complex program requires a
much higher investment in testing than a simple one. Putting it another way, a
small script that is only going to be used once, to produce one figure, probably
doesn't need separate testing: its output is either correct or not. A linear
algebra library that will be used by thousands of people in twice that number of
applications over the course of a decade, on the other hand, definitely does.
The key is identify and prioritise against what will most affect the code's
ability to generate accurate results.

It's also important to remember that unit testing cannot catch every bug in an
application, no matter how many tests you write. To mitigate this manual testing
is also important. Also remember to test using as much input data as you can,
since very often code is developed and tested against the same small sets of
data. Increasing the amount of data you test against - from numerous sources -
gives you greater confidence that the results are correct.

Our software will inevitably increase in complexity as it develops. Using
automated testing where appropriate can save us considerable time, especially in
the long term, and allows others to verify against correct behaviour.

## Key Points

- We can assign multiple inputs to tests using parametrisation.
- It’s important to understand the **coverage** of our tests across our code.
- Writing unit tests takes time, so apply them where it makes the most sense.

Commit message:

add learning objectives for Testing lesson

technology_and_tooling/testing/scaling_up.md, after:

---
name: Scaling Up Unit Testing
id: scaling_up
dependsOn: [
  technology_and_tooling.testing.automated_testing
]
tags: [pytest]
learningOutcomes:
  - Use parameterisation to automatically run tests over a set of inputs.
  - Use code coverage to understand how much of our code is being tested using unit tests.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Aleksandra Nenadic, Steve Crouch, James Graham, et al. (2022). carpentries-incubator/python-intermediate-development: beta (beta). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057"
      url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
    - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1 
      url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
      image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
      license: CC-BY-4.0


---

## Introduction

We're starting to build up a number of tests that test the same function, but
just with different parameters. However, continuing to write a new function for
every single test case isn't likely to scale well as our development progresses.
How can we make our job of writing tests more efficient? And importantly, as the
number of tests increases, how can we determine how much of our code base is
actually being tested?

## Parameterising Our Unit Tests

So far, we've been writing a single function for every new test we need. But
when we simply want to use the same test code but with different data for
another test, it would be great to be able to specify multiple sets of data to
use with the same test code. Test **parameterisation** gives us this.

So instead of writing a separate function for each different test, we can
**parameterise** the tests with multiple test inputs. For example, in
`tests/test_models.py` let us rewrite the `test_daily_mean_zeros()` and
`test_daily_mean_integers()` into a single test function:

~~~python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0], [0, 0], [0, 0] ], [0, 0]),
        ([ [1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6] ], [3, 4]),
    ])
def test_daily_mean(test, expected):
    """Test mean function works for array of zeroes and positive integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_mean
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_mean(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))
~~~

Here, we use Pytest's **mark** capability to add metadata to this specific test - in this case, marking that it's a parameterised test. `parameterize()`
function is actually a [Python **decorator**](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/decorator). A
decorator, when applied to a function, adds some functionality to it when it is
called, and here, what we want to do is specify multiple input and expected
output test cases so the function is called over each of these inputs
automatically when this test is called.

We specify these as arguments to the `parameterize()` decorator, firstly
indicating the names of these arguments that will be passed to the function
(`test`, `expected`), and secondly the actual arguments themselves that
correspond to each of these names - the input data (the `test` argument), and
the expected result (the `expected` argument). In this case, we are passing in
two tests to `test_daily_mean()` which will be run sequentially.

So our first test will run `daily_mean()` on `[ [0, 0], [0, 0], [0, 0] ]` (our
`test` argument), and check to see if it equals `[0, 0]` (our `expected`
argument). Similarly, our second test will run `daily_mean()` with `[ [1, 2],
[3, 4], [5, 6] ]` and check it produces `[3, 4]`.

The big plus here is that we don't need to write separate functions for each of
the tests - our test code can remain compact and readable as we write more tests
and adding more tests scales better as our code becomes more complex.

::::challenge{id="write-parameterised-unit-tests"  title="Write Parameterised Unit Tests"}

Rewrite your test functions for `daily_max()` and `daily_min()` to be parameterised, adding in new test cases for each of them.

:::solution

~~~python
...
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0] ], [0, 0, 0]),
        ([ [4, 2, 5], [1, 6, 2], [4, 1, 9] ], [4, 6, 9]),
        ([ [4, -2, 5], [1, -6, 2], [-4, -1, 9] ], [4, -1, 9]),
    ])
def test_daily_max(test, expected):
    """Test max function works for zeroes, positive integers, mix of positive/negative integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_max
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_max(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))


@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "test, expected",
    [
        ([ [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0] ], [0, 0, 0]),
        ([ [4, 2, 5], [1, 6, 2], [4, 1, 9] ], [1, 1, 2]),
        ([ [4, -2, 5], [1, -6, 2], [-4, -1, 9] ], [-4, -6, 2]),
    ])
def test_daily_min(test, expected):
    """Test min function works for zeroes, positive integers, mix of positive/negative integers."""
    from inflammation.models import daily_min
    npt.assert_array_equal(daily_min(np.array(test)), np.array(expected))
...
~~~

:::
::::

## Code Coverage - How Much of Our Code is Tested?

Pytest can't think of test cases for us. We still have to decide what to test
and how many tests to run. Our best guide here is economics: we want the tests
that are most likely to give us useful information that we don't already have.
For example, if `daily_mean(np.array([[2, 0], [4, 0]])))` works, there's
probably not much point testing `daily_mean(np.array([[3, 0], [4, 0]])))`, since
it's hard to think of a bug that would show up in one case but not in the other.

Now, we should try to choose tests that are as different from each other as
possible, so that we force the code we're testing to execute in all the
different ways it can - to ensure our tests have a high degree of **code
coverage**.

A simple way to check the code coverage for a set of tests is to use `pytest` to
tell us how many statements in our code are being tested. By installing a Python
package to our virtual environment called `pytest-cov` that is used by Pytest
and using that, we can find this out:

~~~bash
pip install pytest-cov
python -m pytest --cov=inflammation.models tests/test_models.py
~~~

So here, we specify the additional named argument `--cov` to `pytest` specifying the code to analyse for test coverage.

~~~text
============================= test session starts ==============================
platform darwin -- Python 3.9.6, pytest-6.2.5, py-1.11.0, pluggy-1.0.0
rootdir: /Users/alex/python-intermediate-inflammation
plugins: anyio-3.3.4, cov-3.0.0
collected 9 items                                                               

tests/test_models.py .........                                            [100%]

---------- coverage: platform darwin, python 3.9.6-final-0 -----------
Name                     Stmts   Miss  Cover
--------------------------------------------
inflammation/models.py       9      1    89%
--------------------------------------------
TOTAL                        9      1    89%

============================== 9 passed in 0.26s ===============================
~~~

Here we can see that our tests are doing very well - 89% of statements in
`inflammation/models.py` have been executed. But which statements are not being
tested? The additional argument `--cov-report term-missing` can tell us:

~~~bash
python -m pytest --cov=inflammation.models --cov-report term-missing tests/test_models.py
~~~

~~~text
...
Name                     Stmts   Miss  Cover   Missing
------------------------------------------------------
inflammation/models.py       9      1    89%   18
------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL                        9      1    89%
...
~~~

So there's still one statement not being tested at line 18, and it turns out
it's in the function `load_csv()`. Here we should consider whether or not to
write a test for this function, and, in general, any other functions that may
not be tested. Of course, if there are hundreds or thousands of lines that are
not covered it may not be feasible to write tests for them all. But we should
prioritise the ones for which we write tests, considering how often they're
used, how complex they are, and importantly, the extent to which they affect our
program's results.

:::callout

## What about Testing Against Indeterminate Output?

What if your implementation depends on a degree of random behaviour? This can be
desired within a number of applications, particularly in simulations (for
example, molecular simulations) or other stochastic behavioural models of
complex systems. So how can you test against such systems if the outputs are
different when given the same inputs?

One way is to *remove the randomness* during testing. For those portions of your
code that use a language feature or library to generate a random number, you can
instead produce a known sequence of numbers instead when testing, to make the
results deterministic and hence easier to test against. You could encapsulate
this different behaviour in separate functions, methods, or classes and call the
appropriate one depending on whether you are testing or not. This is essentially
a type of **mocking**, where you are creating a "mock" version that mimics some
behaviour for the purposes of testing.

Another way is to *control the randomness* during testing to provide results
that are deterministic - the same each time. Implementations of randomness in
computing languages, including Python, are actually never truly random - they
are **pseudorandom**: the sequence of 'random' numbers are typically generated
using a mathematical algorithm. A **seed** value is used to initialise an
implementation's random number generator, and from that point, the sequence of
numbers is actually deterministic. Many implementations just use the system time
as the default seed, but you can set your own. By doing so, the generated
sequence of numbers is the same, e.g. using Python's `random` library to
randomly select a sample of ten numbers from a sequence between 0-99:

~~~python
import random

random.seed(1)
print(random.sample(range(0, 100), 10))
random.seed(1)
print(random.sample(range(0, 100), 10))
~~~

Will produce:

~~~text
[17, 72, 97, 8, 32, 15, 63, 57, 60, 83]
[17, 72, 97, 8, 32, 15, 63, 57, 60, 83]
~~~

So since your program's randomness is essentially eliminated, your tests can be
written to test against the known output. The trick of course, is to ensure that
the output being testing against is definitively correct!

The other thing you can do while keeping the random behaviour, is to *test the
output data against expected constraints* of that output. For example, if you
know that all data should be within particular ranges, or within a particular
statistical distribution type (e.g. normal distribution over time), you can test
against that, conducting multiple test runs that take advantage of the
randomness to fill the known "space" of expected results. Note that this isn't
as precise or complete, and bear in mind this could mean you need to run *a lot*
of tests which may take considerable time.

:::

## Limits to Testing

Like any other piece of experimental apparatus, a complex program requires a
much higher investment in testing than a simple one. Putting it another way, a
small script that is only going to be used once, to produce one figure, probably
doesn't need separate testing: its output is either correct or not. A linear
algebra library that will be used by thousands of people in twice that number of
applications over the course of a decade, on the other hand, definitely does.
The key is identify and prioritise against what will most affect the code's
ability to generate accurate results.

It's also important to remember that unit testing cannot catch every bug in an
application, no matter how many tests you write. To mitigate this manual testing
is also important. Also remember to test using as much input data as you can,
since very often code is developed and tested against the same small sets of
data. Increasing the amount of data you test against - from numerous sources -
gives you greater confidence that the results are correct.

Our software will inevitably increase in complexity as it develops. Using
automated testing where appropriate can save us considerable time, especially in
the long term, and allows others to verify against correct behaviour.

## Key Points

- We can assign multiple inputs to tests using parametrisation.
- It’s important to understand the **coverage** of our tests across our code.
- Writing unit tests takes time, so apply them where it makes the most sense.
