technology_and_tooling/version_control/08-ignore.md, before:

---
name: Ignoring Things
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.version_control.07-branches
]
tags: [git]
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/git-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/git-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

What if we have files that we **do not** want Git to track for us,
like **backup files** created by our editor
or **intermediate** files created during data analysis.
Let's switch to our dev branch, and create a few dummy files:

~~~bash
git checkout dev
mkdir results
touch a.dat b.dat c.dat results/a.out results/b.out
~~~

and see what Git says:

~~~bash
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Untracked files:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
# a.dat
# b.dat
# c.dat
# results/
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
~~~

Putting these files under version control would be a **waste of disk space**.
What's worse,
having them all listed could **distract** us from changes that actually matter,
so let's tell Git to **ignore** them.

We do this by creating a file in the root directory of our project called `.gitignore`.

~~~bash
nano .gitignore
cat .gitignore
~~~

~~~text
*.dat
results/
~~~

These patterns tell Git to **ignore** any file whose name ends in **`.dat`**
and everything in the **`results`** directory.
(If any of these files were **already** being tracked,
Git would **continue** to track them.)

Once we have created this file,
the output of `git status` is much cleaner:

~~~bash
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Untracked files:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
# .gitignore
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
~~~

The only thing Git notices now is the newly-created `.gitignore` file.
You might think we wouldn't want to track it,
but everyone we're **sharing** our repository with will probably **want to ignore
the same** things that we're ignoring.
Let's add and commit `.gitignore`:

~~~bash
git add .gitignore
git commit -m "Add the ignore file"
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
nothing to commit, working directory clean
~~~

As a bonus,
using `.gitignore` helps us **avoid accidentally adding files** to the repository that we don't want.

~~~bash
git add a.dat
~~~

~~~text
The following paths are ignored by one of your .gitignore files:
a.dat
Use -f if you really want to add them.
fatal: no files added
~~~

If we really want to override our ignore settings,
we can use `git add -f` to force Git to add something.
We can also always see the status of ignored files if we want:

~~~bash
git status --ignored
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Ignored files:
#  (use "git add -f <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
#        a.dat
#        b.dat
#        c.dat
#        results/

nothing to commit, working directory clean
~~~

Force adding can be useful for adding a `.gitkeep` file. You can't add empty directories to a repository- they have to have some files within them. But if your code expects there to be a `results/` directory to output to, for example, this can be a problem. Users will run your code, and have it error out at a missing directory and have to create it themselves.

Instead, we can create an empty `.gitkeep` file using `touch` in the `results/` directory, and force-add it. As it starts with a `.`, it's a special file and won't appear in `ls` (only `ls -a`), but it will ensure that the directory structure is kept as part of your repository.

Commit message:

Display learning objectives in the lessons (#127)
* add learning objectives for Continuous Integration lesson

* add learning objectives for collaboration lesson

* add learning objectives for Testing lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Scalability Profiling lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Intro

* fix typo

* add leraning objectives for object-oriented python

* add learning objectives for intro to bash

* add learning objectives for version control lesson

technology_and_tooling/version_control/08-ignore.md, after:

---
name: Ignoring Things
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.version_control.07-branches
]
tags: [git]
learningOutcomes:
  - Use a .gitignore file to exclude specific files from version control.
  - Explain the importance and benefits of using .gitignore files.
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/git-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/git-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

What if we have files that we **do not** want Git to track for us,
like **backup files** created by our editor
or **intermediate** files created during data analysis.
Let's switch to our dev branch, and create a few dummy files:

~~~bash
git checkout dev
mkdir results
touch a.dat b.dat c.dat results/a.out results/b.out
~~~

and see what Git says:

~~~bash
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Untracked files:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
# a.dat
# b.dat
# c.dat
# results/
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
~~~

Putting these files under version control would be a **waste of disk space**.
What's worse,
having them all listed could **distract** us from changes that actually matter,
so let's tell Git to **ignore** them.

We do this by creating a file in the root directory of our project called `.gitignore`.

~~~bash
nano .gitignore
cat .gitignore
~~~

~~~text
*.dat
results/
~~~

These patterns tell Git to **ignore** any file whose name ends in **`.dat`**
and everything in the **`results`** directory.
(If any of these files were **already** being tracked,
Git would **continue** to track them.)

Once we have created this file,
the output of `git status` is much cleaner:

~~~bash
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Untracked files:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
# .gitignore
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
~~~

The only thing Git notices now is the newly-created `.gitignore` file.
You might think we wouldn't want to track it,
but everyone we're **sharing** our repository with will probably **want to ignore
the same** things that we're ignoring.
Let's add and commit `.gitignore`:

~~~bash
git add .gitignore
git commit -m "Add the ignore file"
git status
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
nothing to commit, working directory clean
~~~

As a bonus,
using `.gitignore` helps us **avoid accidentally adding files** to the repository that we don't want.

~~~bash
git add a.dat
~~~

~~~text
The following paths are ignored by one of your .gitignore files:
a.dat
Use -f if you really want to add them.
fatal: no files added
~~~

If we really want to override our ignore settings,
we can use `git add -f` to force Git to add something.
We can also always see the status of ignored files if we want:

~~~bash
git status --ignored
~~~

~~~text
# On branch dev
# Ignored files:
#  (use "git add -f <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
#
#        a.dat
#        b.dat
#        c.dat
#        results/

nothing to commit, working directory clean
~~~

Force adding can be useful for adding a `.gitkeep` file. You can't add empty directories to a repository- they have to have some files within them. But if your code expects there to be a `results/` directory to output to, for example, this can be a problem. Users will run your code, and have it error out at a missing directory and have to create it themselves.

Instead, we can create an empty `.gitkeep` file using `touch` in the `results/` directory, and force-add it. As it starts with a `.`, it's a special file and won't appear in `ls` (only `ls -a`), but it will ensure that the directory structure is kept as part of your repository.
