technology_and_tooling/bash_shell/03-create.md, before:

---
name: Creating Things
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.bash_shell.02-filedir
]
tags: [bash]
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/shell-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/shell-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

We now know how to explore files and directories,
but how do we create them in the first place?

First, let's check where we are:

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

If you're not in this directory, use the `cd` command to navigate to it as covered in the last lesson, for example:

~~~bash
cd ~/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

### Creating a new directory

Now let's use `ls -F` to see what our test directory contains:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
creatures/          molecules/          notes.txt           solar.pdf
data/               north-pacific-gyre/ pizza.cfg           writing/
~~~

Let's create a new directory called `thesis` using the command `mkdir thesis`
(which has no output):

~~~bash
mkdir thesis
~~~

As you might (or might not) guess from its name,
`mkdir` means "make directory".
Since `thesis` is a relative path
(i.e., doesn't have a leading slash),
the new directory is created in the current working directory:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
creatures/  north-pacific-gyre/  thesis/
data/       notes.txt            writing/
Desktop/    pizza.cfg
molecules/  solar.pdf
~~~

However, there's nothing in it yet - this will show no output:

~~~bash
ls -F thesis
~~~

### Creating a new text file

Now we'll create a new file using a text editor in this new directory.

:::callout

## Which Editor?

When we say, "`nano` is a text editor," we really do mean "text": it can
only work with plain character data, not tables, images, or any other
human-friendly media. We use it in examples because almost anyone can
drive it anywhere without training, but please use something more
powerful for real work.

On Windows, you may wish to use [Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org/).
A more powerful example is Microsoft's [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
It's a fairly standard text editor that can be
installed on Windows, Mac or Linux but also has some handy features like
code highlighting that make it easy to write scripts and code. Similar
editors exist like [Atom](https://atom.io/), a highly customisable text editor which
also runs on these platforms.

Your choice of editor will depend on the size of project you're working on,
and how comfortable you are with the terminal.
:::

Let's first change our working directory to `thesis` using `cd`,
and then we'll use the `Nano` editor to create a text file called `draft.txt`, and then save it in that directory.

~~~bash
cd thesis
nano draft.txt
~~~

We add a filename after the `nano` command to tell it that we want to edit (or in this case create) a file.

Now, let's type in a few lines of text, for example:

![Nano in action](fig/nano-screenshot.png)

Once we have a few words, to save this data in a new `draft.txt` file we then use `Control-O` (pressing `Control` and the letter `O` at the same time), and then press
`Enter` to confirm the filename.

Once our file is saved,
we can use `Control-X` to quit the editor and return to the shell.
`nano` doesn't leave any output on the screen after it exits,
but `ls` now shows that we have created a file called `draft.txt`:

Now we've saved the file, we can use `ls` to see that there is a new file in the directory called `draft.txt`:

~~~bash
ls
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

We can use the shell on its own to take a look at its contents using the `cat` command (which we can use to print the contents of files):

~~~bash
cat draft.txt
~~~

~~~text
It's not "publish or perish" any more,
it's "share and thrive".
~~~

### Deleting files and directories

Now, let's assume we didn't actually need to create this file. We can delete it by running `rm draft.txt`:

~~~bash
rm draft.txt
~~~

This command removes files (`rm` is short for "remove").
If we run `ls` again,
its output is empty once more,
which tells us that our file is gone:

~~~bash
ls
~~~

:::callout

## Deleting Is Forever

The Bash shell doesn't have a trash bin that we can recover deleted
files from.  Instead,
when we delete files, they are unhooked from the file system so that
their storage space on disk can be recycled. Tools for finding and
recovering deleted files do exist, but there's no guarantee they'll
work in any particular situation, since the computer may recycle the
file's disk space right away.
:::

But what if we want to delete a directory, perhaps one that already contains a file? Let's re-create that file
and then move up one directory using `cd ..`:

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/test_directory/thesis
~~~

~~~bash
nano draft.txt
ls
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

~~~bash
cd ..
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

If we try to remove the entire `thesis` directory using `rm thesis`,
we get an error message:

~~~bash
rm thesis
~~~

~~~text
rm: cannot remove `thesis': Is a directory
~~~

On a Mac, it may look a bit different (`rm: thesis: is a directory`), but means the same thing.

This happens because `rm` only works on files, not directories.
The right command is `rmdir`,
which is short for "remove directory".
It doesn't work yet either, though,
because the directory we're trying to remove isn't empty (again, it may look a bit different on a Mac):

~~~bash
rmdir thesis
~~~

~~~text
rmdir: failed to remove `thesis': Directory not empty
~~~

This little safety feature can save you a lot of grief,
particularly if you are a bad typist.
To really get rid of `thesis` we must first delete the file `draft.txt`:

~~~bash
rm thesis/draft.txt
~~~

The directory is now empty, so `rmdir` can delete it:

~~~bash
rmdir thesis
~~~

:::callout

## With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility

Removing the files in a directory just so that we can remove the
directory quickly becomes tedious. Instead, we can use `rm` with the
`-r` flag (which stands for "recursive"):

~~~bash
rm -r thesis
~~~

This removes everything in the directory, then the directory itself. If
the directory contains sub-directories, `rm -r` does the same thing to
them, and so on. It's very handy, but can do a lot of damage if used
without care.
:::

### Renaming and moving files and directories

Let's create that directory and file one more time.

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/user/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

~~~bash
mkdir thesis
~~~

Again, put anything you like in this file (note we're giving the `thesis` path to `nano` as well as the `draft.txt` filename, so we create it in that directory):

~~~bash
nano thesis/draft.txt
ls thesis
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

`draft.txt` isn't a particularly informative name,
so let's change the file's name using `mv`,
which is short for "move":

~~~bash
mv thesis/draft.txt thesis/quotes.txt
~~~

The first parameter tells `mv` what we're "moving",
while the second is where it's to go.
In this case,
we're moving `thesis/draft.txt` (the file `draft.txt` in the `thesis` directory) to `thesis/quotes.txt` (the `quotes.txt` again in the `thesis` directory),
which has the same effect as renaming the file.
Sure enough,
`ls` shows us that `thesis` now contains one file called `quotes.txt`:

~~~bash
ls thesis
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt
~~~

Just for the sake of inconsistency,
`mv` also works on directories --- there is no separate `mvdir` command.

Let's move `quotes.txt` into the current working directory.
We use `mv` once again,
but this time we'll just use the name of a directory as the second parameter
to tell `mv` that we want to keep the filename,
but put the file somewhere new.
(This is why the command is called "move".)
In this case,
the directory name we use is the special directory name `.` that we mentioned earlier.

~~~bash
mv thesis/quotes.txt .
~~~

The effect is to move the file from the directory it was in to the current working directory.
`ls` now shows us that `thesis` is empty:

~~~bash
ls thesis
~~~

Further,
`ls` with a filename or directory name as a parameter only lists that file or directory.
We can use this to see that `quotes.txt` is still in our current directory:

~~~bash
ls quotes.txt
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt
~~~

### Copying files

The `cp` command works very much like `mv`,
except it copies a file instead of moving it.
We can check that it did the right thing using `ls`
with two paths as parameters --- like most Unix commands,
`ls` can be given thousands of paths at once:

~~~bash
cp quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
ls quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt   thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

To prove that we made a copy,
let's delete the `quotes.txt` file in the current directory
and then run that same `ls` again (we can get to this command by pressing the up arrow twice).

~~~bash
rm quotes.txt
ls quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

~~~text
ls: cannot access quotes.txt: No such file or directory
thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

This time it tells us that it can't find `quotes.txt` in the current directory,
but it does find the copy in `thesis` that we didn't delete.

## Exercises

::::challenge{id=renaming-files title="Renaming Files"}
Suppose that you created a `.txt` file in your current directory to contain a list of the
statistical tests you will need to do to analyze your data, and named it: `statstics.txt`

After creating and saving this file you realize you misspelled the filename! You want to
correct the mistake, which of the following commands could you use to do so?

1. `cp statstics.txt statistics.txt`
2. `mv statstics.txt statistics.txt`
3. `mv statstics.txt .`
4. `cp statstics.txt .`

:::solution
**2** is the best choice. Passing `mv` or `cp` `.` as a destination moves or copies
without renaming, so the spelling mistake won't be fixed.

Both **1** and **2** will leave you with a file called `statistics.txt` at the end, but if you use `cp` it will be a copy, and you'll still have your incorrectly-named original.
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=moving-copying title="Moving and Copying"}
What is the output of the closing `ls` command in the sequence shown below?

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/jamie/data
~~~

~~~bash
ls
~~~

~~~bash
proteins.dat
~~~

~~~bash
mkdir recombine
mv proteins.dat recombine
cp recombine/proteins.dat ../proteins-saved.dat
ls
~~~

1. `proteins-saved.dat recombine`
2. `recombine`
3. `proteins.dat recombine`
4. `proteins-saved.dat`

:::solution
The correct answer is **2**.
The commands showed the directory contains a single file named `proteins.dat`,
then created a new directory called `recombine`, moved the original `proteins.dat` file into it,
and finally copied `proteins.dat` into **the directory above the current one** as `proteins-saved.dat`.

So as it's in the directory above the current one (`..`), it won't show up when you do `ls` in the current directory.
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=organising-directories-files title="Organising Directories and Files"}
Jamie is working on a project and she sees that her files aren't very well organized:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~bash
analyzed/  fructose.dat    raw/   sucrose.dat
~~~

The `fructose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` files contain output from her data
analysis. What command(s) covered in this lesson does she need to run so that the commands below will produce the output shown?

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
analyzed/   raw/
~~~

~~~bash
ls analyzed
~~~

~~~text
fructose.dat    sucrose.dat
~~~

:::solution
`ls` lists the contents of the current directory, whilst `ls analyzed` lists the contents of the `analyzed` directory.

So we need to move the files `fructose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` out of the current directory, and into the `analyzed` directory, which we do with `mv`.

~~~bash
ls -F
mv fructose.dat analyzed/
mv sucrose.dat analyzed/
ls analyzed
~~~

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=copy-multiple-filenames title="Copy with Multiple Filenames"}
What does `cp` do when given several filenames and a directory name, as in:

~~~bash
mkdir backup
cp thesis/citations.txt thesis/quotations.txt backup
~~~

:::solution
It copies the files to the directory with the same name.

~~~bash
ls backup
~~~

~~~text
citations.txt    quotations.txt
~~~

:::

What does `cp` do when given three or more filenames, as in:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
intro.txt    methods.txt    survey.txt
~~~

~~~bash
cp intro.txt methods.txt survey.txt
~~~

:::solution
You should get an error and the command does nothing.
When passing 3 or more arguments, the last one needs to be a directory.

However,

~~~bash
cp intro.txt methods.txt
~~~

Will not fail even though both of the arguments are existing files - it will copy the contents
of `intro.txt` *over* the contents of `methods.txt`. So be careful!
:::
::::

Commit message:

add learning objectives for intro to bash

technology_and_tooling/bash_shell/03-create.md, after:

---
name: Creating Things
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.bash_shell.02-filedir
]
tags: [bash]
learningOutcomes:
  - Create a directory hierarchy that matches a given diagram.
  - Create files in that hierarchy using an editor or by copying and renaming existing files.
  - Delete, copy and move specified files and/or directories.
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/shell-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/shell-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

We now know how to explore files and directories,
but how do we create them in the first place?

First, let's check where we are:

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

If you're not in this directory, use the `cd` command to navigate to it as covered in the last lesson, for example:

~~~bash
cd ~/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

### Creating a new directory

Now let's use `ls -F` to see what our test directory contains:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
creatures/          molecules/          notes.txt           solar.pdf
data/               north-pacific-gyre/ pizza.cfg           writing/
~~~

Let's create a new directory called `thesis` using the command `mkdir thesis`
(which has no output):

~~~bash
mkdir thesis
~~~

As you might (or might not) guess from its name,
`mkdir` means "make directory".
Since `thesis` is a relative path
(i.e., doesn't have a leading slash),
the new directory is created in the current working directory:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
creatures/  north-pacific-gyre/  thesis/
data/       notes.txt            writing/
Desktop/    pizza.cfg
molecules/  solar.pdf
~~~

However, there's nothing in it yet - this will show no output:

~~~bash
ls -F thesis
~~~

### Creating a new text file

Now we'll create a new file using a text editor in this new directory.

:::callout

## Which Editor?

When we say, "`nano` is a text editor," we really do mean "text": it can
only work with plain character data, not tables, images, or any other
human-friendly media. We use it in examples because almost anyone can
drive it anywhere without training, but please use something more
powerful for real work.

On Windows, you may wish to use [Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org/).
A more powerful example is Microsoft's [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
It's a fairly standard text editor that can be
installed on Windows, Mac or Linux but also has some handy features like
code highlighting that make it easy to write scripts and code. Similar
editors exist like [Atom](https://atom.io/), a highly customisable text editor which
also runs on these platforms.

Your choice of editor will depend on the size of project you're working on,
and how comfortable you are with the terminal.
:::

Let's first change our working directory to `thesis` using `cd`,
and then we'll use the `Nano` editor to create a text file called `draft.txt`, and then save it in that directory.

~~~bash
cd thesis
nano draft.txt
~~~

We add a filename after the `nano` command to tell it that we want to edit (or in this case create) a file.

Now, let's type in a few lines of text, for example:

![Nano in action](fig/nano-screenshot.png)

Once we have a few words, to save this data in a new `draft.txt` file we then use `Control-O` (pressing `Control` and the letter `O` at the same time), and then press
`Enter` to confirm the filename.

Once our file is saved,
we can use `Control-X` to quit the editor and return to the shell.
`nano` doesn't leave any output on the screen after it exits,
but `ls` now shows that we have created a file called `draft.txt`:

Now we've saved the file, we can use `ls` to see that there is a new file in the directory called `draft.txt`:

~~~bash
ls
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

We can use the shell on its own to take a look at its contents using the `cat` command (which we can use to print the contents of files):

~~~bash
cat draft.txt
~~~

~~~text
It's not "publish or perish" any more,
it's "share and thrive".
~~~

### Deleting files and directories

Now, let's assume we didn't actually need to create this file. We can delete it by running `rm draft.txt`:

~~~bash
rm draft.txt
~~~

This command removes files (`rm` is short for "remove").
If we run `ls` again,
its output is empty once more,
which tells us that our file is gone:

~~~bash
ls
~~~

:::callout

## Deleting Is Forever

The Bash shell doesn't have a trash bin that we can recover deleted
files from.  Instead,
when we delete files, they are unhooked from the file system so that
their storage space on disk can be recycled. Tools for finding and
recovering deleted files do exist, but there's no guarantee they'll
work in any particular situation, since the computer may recycle the
file's disk space right away.
:::

But what if we want to delete a directory, perhaps one that already contains a file? Let's re-create that file
and then move up one directory using `cd ..`:

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/test_directory/thesis
~~~

~~~bash
nano draft.txt
ls
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

~~~bash
cd ..
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/nelle/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

If we try to remove the entire `thesis` directory using `rm thesis`,
we get an error message:

~~~bash
rm thesis
~~~

~~~text
rm: cannot remove `thesis': Is a directory
~~~

On a Mac, it may look a bit different (`rm: thesis: is a directory`), but means the same thing.

This happens because `rm` only works on files, not directories.
The right command is `rmdir`,
which is short for "remove directory".
It doesn't work yet either, though,
because the directory we're trying to remove isn't empty (again, it may look a bit different on a Mac):

~~~bash
rmdir thesis
~~~

~~~text
rmdir: failed to remove `thesis': Directory not empty
~~~

This little safety feature can save you a lot of grief,
particularly if you are a bad typist.
To really get rid of `thesis` we must first delete the file `draft.txt`:

~~~bash
rm thesis/draft.txt
~~~

The directory is now empty, so `rmdir` can delete it:

~~~bash
rmdir thesis
~~~

:::callout

## With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility

Removing the files in a directory just so that we can remove the
directory quickly becomes tedious. Instead, we can use `rm` with the
`-r` flag (which stands for "recursive"):

~~~bash
rm -r thesis
~~~

This removes everything in the directory, then the directory itself. If
the directory contains sub-directories, `rm -r` does the same thing to
them, and so on. It's very handy, but can do a lot of damage if used
without care.
:::

### Renaming and moving files and directories

Let's create that directory and file one more time.

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/user/shell-novice/shell/test_directory
~~~

~~~bash
mkdir thesis
~~~

Again, put anything you like in this file (note we're giving the `thesis` path to `nano` as well as the `draft.txt` filename, so we create it in that directory):

~~~bash
nano thesis/draft.txt
ls thesis
~~~

~~~text
draft.txt
~~~

`draft.txt` isn't a particularly informative name,
so let's change the file's name using `mv`,
which is short for "move":

~~~bash
mv thesis/draft.txt thesis/quotes.txt
~~~

The first parameter tells `mv` what we're "moving",
while the second is where it's to go.
In this case,
we're moving `thesis/draft.txt` (the file `draft.txt` in the `thesis` directory) to `thesis/quotes.txt` (the `quotes.txt` again in the `thesis` directory),
which has the same effect as renaming the file.
Sure enough,
`ls` shows us that `thesis` now contains one file called `quotes.txt`:

~~~bash
ls thesis
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt
~~~

Just for the sake of inconsistency,
`mv` also works on directories --- there is no separate `mvdir` command.

Let's move `quotes.txt` into the current working directory.
We use `mv` once again,
but this time we'll just use the name of a directory as the second parameter
to tell `mv` that we want to keep the filename,
but put the file somewhere new.
(This is why the command is called "move".)
In this case,
the directory name we use is the special directory name `.` that we mentioned earlier.

~~~bash
mv thesis/quotes.txt .
~~~

The effect is to move the file from the directory it was in to the current working directory.
`ls` now shows us that `thesis` is empty:

~~~bash
ls thesis
~~~

Further,
`ls` with a filename or directory name as a parameter only lists that file or directory.
We can use this to see that `quotes.txt` is still in our current directory:

~~~bash
ls quotes.txt
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt
~~~

### Copying files

The `cp` command works very much like `mv`,
except it copies a file instead of moving it.
We can check that it did the right thing using `ls`
with two paths as parameters --- like most Unix commands,
`ls` can be given thousands of paths at once:

~~~bash
cp quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
ls quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

~~~text
quotes.txt   thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

To prove that we made a copy,
let's delete the `quotes.txt` file in the current directory
and then run that same `ls` again (we can get to this command by pressing the up arrow twice).

~~~bash
rm quotes.txt
ls quotes.txt thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

~~~text
ls: cannot access quotes.txt: No such file or directory
thesis/quotations.txt
~~~

This time it tells us that it can't find `quotes.txt` in the current directory,
but it does find the copy in `thesis` that we didn't delete.

## Exercises

::::challenge{id=renaming-files title="Renaming Files"}
Suppose that you created a `.txt` file in your current directory to contain a list of the
statistical tests you will need to do to analyze your data, and named it: `statstics.txt`

After creating and saving this file you realize you misspelled the filename! You want to
correct the mistake, which of the following commands could you use to do so?

1. `cp statstics.txt statistics.txt`
2. `mv statstics.txt statistics.txt`
3. `mv statstics.txt .`
4. `cp statstics.txt .`

:::solution
**2** is the best choice. Passing `mv` or `cp` `.` as a destination moves or copies
without renaming, so the spelling mistake won't be fixed.

Both **1** and **2** will leave you with a file called `statistics.txt` at the end, but if you use `cp` it will be a copy, and you'll still have your incorrectly-named original.
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=moving-copying title="Moving and Copying"}
What is the output of the closing `ls` command in the sequence shown below?

~~~bash
pwd
~~~

~~~text
/Users/jamie/data
~~~

~~~bash
ls
~~~

~~~bash
proteins.dat
~~~

~~~bash
mkdir recombine
mv proteins.dat recombine
cp recombine/proteins.dat ../proteins-saved.dat
ls
~~~

1. `proteins-saved.dat recombine`
2. `recombine`
3. `proteins.dat recombine`
4. `proteins-saved.dat`

:::solution
The correct answer is **2**.
The commands showed the directory contains a single file named `proteins.dat`,
then created a new directory called `recombine`, moved the original `proteins.dat` file into it,
and finally copied `proteins.dat` into **the directory above the current one** as `proteins-saved.dat`.

So as it's in the directory above the current one (`..`), it won't show up when you do `ls` in the current directory.
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=organising-directories-files title="Organising Directories and Files"}
Jamie is working on a project and she sees that her files aren't very well organized:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~bash
analyzed/  fructose.dat    raw/   sucrose.dat
~~~

The `fructose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` files contain output from her data
analysis. What command(s) covered in this lesson does she need to run so that the commands below will produce the output shown?

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
analyzed/   raw/
~~~

~~~bash
ls analyzed
~~~

~~~text
fructose.dat    sucrose.dat
~~~

:::solution
`ls` lists the contents of the current directory, whilst `ls analyzed` lists the contents of the `analyzed` directory.

So we need to move the files `fructose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` out of the current directory, and into the `analyzed` directory, which we do with `mv`.

~~~bash
ls -F
mv fructose.dat analyzed/
mv sucrose.dat analyzed/
ls analyzed
~~~

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=copy-multiple-filenames title="Copy with Multiple Filenames"}
What does `cp` do when given several filenames and a directory name, as in:

~~~bash
mkdir backup
cp thesis/citations.txt thesis/quotations.txt backup
~~~

:::solution
It copies the files to the directory with the same name.

~~~bash
ls backup
~~~

~~~text
citations.txt    quotations.txt
~~~

:::

What does `cp` do when given three or more filenames, as in:

~~~bash
ls -F
~~~

~~~text
intro.txt    methods.txt    survey.txt
~~~

~~~bash
cp intro.txt methods.txt survey.txt
~~~

:::solution
You should get an error and the command does nothing.
When passing 3 or more arguments, the last one needs to be a directory.

However,

~~~bash
cp intro.txt methods.txt
~~~

Will not fail even though both of the arguments are existing files - it will copy the contents
of `intro.txt` *over* the contents of `methods.txt`. So be careful!
:::
::::
