technology_and_tooling/bash_shell/06-loop.md, before:

---
name: Loops
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.bash_shell.05-script
]
tags: [bash]
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/shell-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/shell-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Wildcards and tab completion are two ways to reduce typing as well as typing mistakes.
Another is to tell the shell to do something over and over again, which could save us considerable time,
depending on how many times we need the shell to do this thing.

### Couldn't we just

Suppose we have several hundred genome data files named `basilisk.dat`, `minotaur.dat`, `unicorn.dat`, and so on.
In this example,
we'll use the `test_directory/creatures` directory which only has three example files,
but the principles can be applied to many many more files at once.
Let's first go to the `creatures` directory (using tab completion to enter the full directory will save considerable
typing here!):

~~~bash
cd ~/shell-novice/shell/test_directory/creatures
ls
~~~

~~~text
basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
~~~

We would like to modify these files, but also save a version of the original files and rename them
as `original-basilisk.dat`, `original-minotaur.dat`, `original-unicorn.dat`.
We can't use the following (don't type this, it's just for illustrative purposes):

~~~bash
mv *.dat original-*.dat
~~~

Because as we learnt previously, with wildcards that would expand to:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat original-*.dat
~~~

This wouldn't back up our files, instead we would get an error. If on a Mac or Linux it would look like:

~~~text
mv: target `original-*.dat' is not a directory
~~~

Or if on Windows using Git Bash, we would see:

~~~text
usage: mv [-f | -i | -n] [-v] source target
       mv [-f | -i | -n] [-v] source ... directory
~~~

Even though the error is different, the cause is the same.
It arises when `mv` receives more than two inputs. When this happens, it
expects the last input to be a directory where it can move all the files it was passed.
Since there is no directory named `original-*.dat` in the `creatures` directory we get an
error.

### Using a loop to do something multiple times

Instead, we can use a **loop**
to do some operation once for each thing in a list.
Here's a simple example that displays the first three lines of each file in turn.

Let's create a new shell script using `nano` called `top.sh` that uses a loop.

~~~bash
nano top.sh
~~~

In that file enter the following:

~~~bash
for filename in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $filename
done
~~~

After saving it by using `Control-O` and `Control-X`, run the script:

~~~bash
bash top.sh
~~~

~~~text
COMMON NAME: basilisk
CLASSIFICATION: basiliscus vulgaris
UPDATED: 1745-05-02
COMMON NAME: minotaur
CLASSIFICATION: minotaurus maximus
UPDATED: 1764-09-12
COMMON NAME: unicorn
CLASSIFICATION: equus monoceros
UPDATED: 1738-11-24
~~~

So what's happening, and how does the loop work?

When the shell sees the keyword `for`,
it knows it is supposed to repeat a command (or group of commands) once for each thing in a list.
In this case, the list is the three filenames.
Each time through the loop,
the name of the thing currently being operated on is assigned to
the **variable** called `filename`.

:::callout

## What is a variable?

Variables are used to store information that we want to refer to later, and are a fundamental concept in
general programming. Think of a variable as a container with a name
that we put something inside. So for example, if we want to store the number 5, we could write that down and
put it in the container named 'count'. And it doesn't have to be a number - as in our loop example with the
variable 'filename' it can also hold a collection of characters, in this case a filename.
We give the containers names since we could use many variables within a single script or program and we
need to be able to reference them all.

When we need it later, we extract that value from the container by referencing that container's name 'count'.
We can also change what's in the container, essentially changing the value of the variable. From that point on,
when we extract the value from the variable, it will be the new value.
:::

Inside the loop,
we get the variable's value by putting `$` in front of it:
`$filename` is `basilisk.dat` the first time through the loop,
`minotaur.dat` the second, `unicorn.dat` the third,
and so on.

By using the dollar sign we are telling the shell interpreter to treat
`filename` as a variable name and substitute its value on its place,
but not as some text or external command. When using variables it is also
possible to put the names into curly braces to clearly delimit the variable
name: `$filename` is equivalent to `${filename}`, but is different from
`${file}name`. You may find this notation in other people's programs.

Finally,
the command that's actually being run is our old friend `head`,
so this loop prints out the first three lines of each data file in turn.

:::callout

## Why the extra spaces?

Note the use of spaces for indentation before the `head` command.
This line is part of the body of the loop (the part that gets executed many times)
and whilst extra spaces don't affect how the
script runs, it is considered best practice to use indentation to highlight the loop body.
In general programming, indentation is very important. Without indentation in code blocks
such as these, code becomes much harder to read.
:::

:::callout

## Dos and don'ts of variable naming

We have called the variable in this loop `filename`
in order to make its purpose clearer to human readers.
The shell itself doesn't care what the variable is called;
if we wrote this loop as:

~~~bash
for x in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $x
done
~~~

or:

~~~bash
for temperature in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $temperature
done
~~~

it would work exactly the same way.
*Don't do this.*
Programs are only useful if people can understand them,
so meaningless names like `x`, or misleading names like `temperature`,
increase the odds that the program won't do what its readers think it does.
:::

### Looping over arbitrary numbers of files

Let's assume there are many more of these `.dat` files. How would we
run a loop over them all? Using what we've learnt
we can solve our original problem using the following loop.
In a new script called `rename.sh` enter the following:

~~~bash
for filename in *.dat
do
    mv $filename original-$filename
done
~~~

Note that here, we use `*.dat` to get a list of all files ending in `.dat`,
which is very similar to doing `ls *.dat`.

This loop runs the `mv` command once for each filename.
The first time,
when `$filename` expands to `basilisk.dat`,
the shell executes:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat original-basilisk.dat
~~~

The second time, the command is:

~~~bash
mv minotaur.dat original-minotaur.dat
~~~

The third time, the command is:

~~~bash
mv unicorn.dat original-unicorn.dat
~~~

Note that once you've run this command once, running it again has an interesting effect that we
likely don't intend - the `.dat` files we end up with are:

~~~text
original-original-basilisk.dat original-original-unicorn.dat
original-original-minotaur.dat
~~~

This is because the `.dat` files picked up by `for filename in *.dat` will now match on `original-basilisk.dat`,
`original-unicorn.dat`, and `original-minotaur.dat`, and each of these files is then renamed with *yet another*
`original-` prefix added to it. This is another example of why you should always ensure you have a backup of
files before you operate on them!

:::callout

## Measure Twice, Run Once

A loop is a way to do many things at once --- or to make many mistakes at
once if it does the wrong thing. One way to check what a loop *would* do
is to echo the commands it would run instead of actually running them.
For example, we could write our file renaming loop like this:

~~~bash
for filename in *.dat
do
    echo mv $filename original-$filename
done
~~~

Instead of running `mv`, this loop runs `echo`, which prints out:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat original-basilisk.dat
mv unicorn.dat original-unicorn.dat
~~~

*without* actually running those commands. We can then use up-arrow to
redisplay the loop, back-arrow to get to the word `echo`, delete it, and
then press "enter" to run the loop with the actual `mv` commands. This
isn't foolproof, but it's a handy way to see what's going to happen when
you're still learning how loops work.
:::

## Exercises

::::challenge{id=save-to-file-1 title="Saving to a File in a Loop, Part 1"}
In the same directory, what is the effect of this loop?

~~~bash
for sugar in *.dat
do
  echo $sugar
  cat $sugar > xylose.dat
done
~~~

1. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, and `sucrose.dat`, and the text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called
    `xylose.dat`.
2. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, and `sucrose.dat`, and the text from all three files would be
    concatenated and saved to a file called `xylose.dat`.
3. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, `sucrose.dat`, and
    `xylose.dat`, and the text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called `xylose.dat`.
4. None of the above.

:::solution

1. Correct.
2. Incorrect, since we're using the `>` redirect operator, which will overwrite any previous contents of `xylose.dat`.
3. Incorrect, since the file `xylose.dat` would not have existed when `*.dat` would have been expanded.
4. Incorrect.

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=save-to-file-2 title="Saving to a File in a Loop, Part 2"}
In another directory, where `ls` returns:

~~~text
fructose.dat    glucose.dat   sucrose.dat   maltose.txt
~~~

What would be the output of the following loop?

~~~bash
for datafile in *.dat
do
  cat $datafile >> sugar.dat
done
~~~

1. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` would be
    concatenated and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
2. The text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
3. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, `sucrose.dat` and `maltose.txt`
    would be concatenated and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
4. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` would be printed
    to the screen and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`

:::solution

1. Correct.
2. Incorrect, since we're looping through each of the other `.dat` files (`fructose.dat` and `glucose.dat`) whose contents would also be included.
3. Incorrect, since `maltose.txt` has a `.txt` extension and not a `.dat` extension, so won't match on `*.dat` and won't be included in the loop.
4. Incorrect, since the `>>` operator redirects all output to the `sugar.dat` file, so we won't see any screen output.

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=doing-dry-run title="Doing a Dry Run"}
Suppose we want to preview the commands the following loop will execute
without actually running those commands:

~~~bash
for file in *.dat
do
  analyze $file > analyzed-$file
done
~~~

What is the difference between the the two loops below, and which one would we
want to run?

~~~bash
# Version 1
for file in *.dat
do
  echo analyze $file > analyzed-$file
done
~~~

~~~bash
# Version 2
for file in *.dat
do
  echo "analyze $file > analyzed-$file"
done
~~~

:::solution
Version 2 is the one that successfully acts as a dry run. In version 1, since the `>` file redirect is not within quotes, the script will create three files `analyzed-basilisk.dat`, `analyzed-minotaur.dat`, and `analyzed-unicorn.dat` which is not what we want.
:::
::::

Commit message:

add learning objectives for intro to bash

technology_and_tooling/bash_shell/06-loop.md, after:

---
name: Loops
dependsOn: [
    technology_and_tooling.bash_shell.05-script
]
tags: [bash]
learningOutcomes:
  - Write a loop that applies one or more commands separately to each file in a set of files.
  - Trace the values taken on by a loop variable during execution of the loop.
  - Explain the difference between the name and the value of a variable.
  - Re-run recently executed commands without retyping them.
attribution:
- citation: >
      This material was originally taken from training materials developed by the
      University of Southampton Research Software Group, which are based on
      the Software Carpentries course "Version Control with Git".
  url: https://github.com/Southampton-RSG-Training/shell-novice/
  image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/shell-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
  license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Wildcards and tab completion are two ways to reduce typing as well as typing mistakes.
Another is to tell the shell to do something over and over again, which could save us considerable time,
depending on how many times we need the shell to do this thing.

### Couldn't we just

Suppose we have several hundred genome data files named `basilisk.dat`, `minotaur.dat`, `unicorn.dat`, and so on.
In this example,
we'll use the `test_directory/creatures` directory which only has three example files,
but the principles can be applied to many many more files at once.
Let's first go to the `creatures` directory (using tab completion to enter the full directory will save considerable
typing here!):

~~~bash
cd ~/shell-novice/shell/test_directory/creatures
ls
~~~

~~~text
basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
~~~

We would like to modify these files, but also save a version of the original files and rename them
as `original-basilisk.dat`, `original-minotaur.dat`, `original-unicorn.dat`.
We can't use the following (don't type this, it's just for illustrative purposes):

~~~bash
mv *.dat original-*.dat
~~~

Because as we learnt previously, with wildcards that would expand to:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat original-*.dat
~~~

This wouldn't back up our files, instead we would get an error. If on a Mac or Linux it would look like:

~~~text
mv: target `original-*.dat' is not a directory
~~~

Or if on Windows using Git Bash, we would see:

~~~text
usage: mv [-f | -i | -n] [-v] source target
       mv [-f | -i | -n] [-v] source ... directory
~~~

Even though the error is different, the cause is the same.
It arises when `mv` receives more than two inputs. When this happens, it
expects the last input to be a directory where it can move all the files it was passed.
Since there is no directory named `original-*.dat` in the `creatures` directory we get an
error.

### Using a loop to do something multiple times

Instead, we can use a **loop**
to do some operation once for each thing in a list.
Here's a simple example that displays the first three lines of each file in turn.

Let's create a new shell script using `nano` called `top.sh` that uses a loop.

~~~bash
nano top.sh
~~~

In that file enter the following:

~~~bash
for filename in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $filename
done
~~~

After saving it by using `Control-O` and `Control-X`, run the script:

~~~bash
bash top.sh
~~~

~~~text
COMMON NAME: basilisk
CLASSIFICATION: basiliscus vulgaris
UPDATED: 1745-05-02
COMMON NAME: minotaur
CLASSIFICATION: minotaurus maximus
UPDATED: 1764-09-12
COMMON NAME: unicorn
CLASSIFICATION: equus monoceros
UPDATED: 1738-11-24
~~~

So what's happening, and how does the loop work?

When the shell sees the keyword `for`,
it knows it is supposed to repeat a command (or group of commands) once for each thing in a list.
In this case, the list is the three filenames.
Each time through the loop,
the name of the thing currently being operated on is assigned to
the **variable** called `filename`.

:::callout

## What is a variable?

Variables are used to store information that we want to refer to later, and are a fundamental concept in
general programming. Think of a variable as a container with a name
that we put something inside. So for example, if we want to store the number 5, we could write that down and
put it in the container named 'count'. And it doesn't have to be a number - as in our loop example with the
variable 'filename' it can also hold a collection of characters, in this case a filename.
We give the containers names since we could use many variables within a single script or program and we
need to be able to reference them all.

When we need it later, we extract that value from the container by referencing that container's name 'count'.
We can also change what's in the container, essentially changing the value of the variable. From that point on,
when we extract the value from the variable, it will be the new value.
:::

Inside the loop,
we get the variable's value by putting `$` in front of it:
`$filename` is `basilisk.dat` the first time through the loop,
`minotaur.dat` the second, `unicorn.dat` the third,
and so on.

By using the dollar sign we are telling the shell interpreter to treat
`filename` as a variable name and substitute its value on its place,
but not as some text or external command. When using variables it is also
possible to put the names into curly braces to clearly delimit the variable
name: `$filename` is equivalent to `${filename}`, but is different from
`${file}name`. You may find this notation in other people's programs.

Finally,
the command that's actually being run is our old friend `head`,
so this loop prints out the first three lines of each data file in turn.

:::callout

## Why the extra spaces?

Note the use of spaces for indentation before the `head` command.
This line is part of the body of the loop (the part that gets executed many times)
and whilst extra spaces don't affect how the
script runs, it is considered best practice to use indentation to highlight the loop body.
In general programming, indentation is very important. Without indentation in code blocks
such as these, code becomes much harder to read.
:::

:::callout

## Dos and don'ts of variable naming

We have called the variable in this loop `filename`
in order to make its purpose clearer to human readers.
The shell itself doesn't care what the variable is called;
if we wrote this loop as:

~~~bash
for x in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $x
done
~~~

or:

~~~bash
for temperature in basilisk.dat minotaur.dat unicorn.dat
do
    head -3 $temperature
done
~~~

it would work exactly the same way.
*Don't do this.*
Programs are only useful if people can understand them,
so meaningless names like `x`, or misleading names like `temperature`,
increase the odds that the program won't do what its readers think it does.
:::

### Looping over arbitrary numbers of files

Let's assume there are many more of these `.dat` files. How would we
run a loop over them all? Using what we've learnt
we can solve our original problem using the following loop.
In a new script called `rename.sh` enter the following:

~~~bash
for filename in *.dat
do
    mv $filename original-$filename
done
~~~

Note that here, we use `*.dat` to get a list of all files ending in `.dat`,
which is very similar to doing `ls *.dat`.

This loop runs the `mv` command once for each filename.
The first time,
when `$filename` expands to `basilisk.dat`,
the shell executes:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat original-basilisk.dat
~~~

The second time, the command is:

~~~bash
mv minotaur.dat original-minotaur.dat
~~~

The third time, the command is:

~~~bash
mv unicorn.dat original-unicorn.dat
~~~

Note that once you've run this command once, running it again has an interesting effect that we
likely don't intend - the `.dat` files we end up with are:

~~~text
original-original-basilisk.dat original-original-unicorn.dat
original-original-minotaur.dat
~~~

This is because the `.dat` files picked up by `for filename in *.dat` will now match on `original-basilisk.dat`,
`original-unicorn.dat`, and `original-minotaur.dat`, and each of these files is then renamed with *yet another*
`original-` prefix added to it. This is another example of why you should always ensure you have a backup of
files before you operate on them!

:::callout

## Measure Twice, Run Once

A loop is a way to do many things at once --- or to make many mistakes at
once if it does the wrong thing. One way to check what a loop *would* do
is to echo the commands it would run instead of actually running them.
For example, we could write our file renaming loop like this:

~~~bash
for filename in *.dat
do
    echo mv $filename original-$filename
done
~~~

Instead of running `mv`, this loop runs `echo`, which prints out:

~~~bash
mv basilisk.dat original-basilisk.dat
mv unicorn.dat original-unicorn.dat
~~~

*without* actually running those commands. We can then use up-arrow to
redisplay the loop, back-arrow to get to the word `echo`, delete it, and
then press "enter" to run the loop with the actual `mv` commands. This
isn't foolproof, but it's a handy way to see what's going to happen when
you're still learning how loops work.
:::

## Exercises

::::challenge{id=save-to-file-1 title="Saving to a File in a Loop, Part 1"}
In the same directory, what is the effect of this loop?

~~~bash
for sugar in *.dat
do
  echo $sugar
  cat $sugar > xylose.dat
done
~~~

1. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, and `sucrose.dat`, and the text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called
    `xylose.dat`.
2. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, and `sucrose.dat`, and the text from all three files would be
    concatenated and saved to a file called `xylose.dat`.
3. Prints `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, `sucrose.dat`, and
    `xylose.dat`, and the text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called `xylose.dat`.
4. None of the above.

:::solution

1. Correct.
2. Incorrect, since we're using the `>` redirect operator, which will overwrite any previous contents of `xylose.dat`.
3. Incorrect, since the file `xylose.dat` would not have existed when `*.dat` would have been expanded.
4. Incorrect.

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=save-to-file-2 title="Saving to a File in a Loop, Part 2"}
In another directory, where `ls` returns:

~~~text
fructose.dat    glucose.dat   sucrose.dat   maltose.txt
~~~

What would be the output of the following loop?

~~~bash
for datafile in *.dat
do
  cat $datafile >> sugar.dat
done
~~~

1. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` would be
    concatenated and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
2. The text from `sucrose.dat` will be saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
3. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat`, `sucrose.dat` and `maltose.txt`
    would be concatenated and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`.
4. All of the text from `fructose.dat`, `glucose.dat` and `sucrose.dat` would be printed
    to the screen and saved to a file called `sugar.dat`

:::solution

1. Correct.
2. Incorrect, since we're looping through each of the other `.dat` files (`fructose.dat` and `glucose.dat`) whose contents would also be included.
3. Incorrect, since `maltose.txt` has a `.txt` extension and not a `.dat` extension, so won't match on `*.dat` and won't be included in the loop.
4. Incorrect, since the `>>` operator redirects all output to the `sugar.dat` file, so we won't see any screen output.

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=doing-dry-run title="Doing a Dry Run"}
Suppose we want to preview the commands the following loop will execute
without actually running those commands:

~~~bash
for file in *.dat
do
  analyze $file > analyzed-$file
done
~~~

What is the difference between the the two loops below, and which one would we
want to run?

~~~bash
# Version 1
for file in *.dat
do
  echo analyze $file > analyzed-$file
done
~~~

~~~bash
# Version 2
for file in *.dat
do
  echo "analyze $file > analyzed-$file"
done
~~~

:::solution
Version 2 is the one that successfully acts as a dry run. In version 1, since the `>` file redirect is not within quotes, the script will create three files `analyzed-basilisk.dat`, `analyzed-minotaur.dat`, and `analyzed-unicorn.dat` which is not what we want.
:::
::::
