high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/01_hpc_intro.md, before:

---
name: Why Use a Cluster?
dependsOn: []
tags: []
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Frequently, research problems that use computing can outgrow the capabilities
of the desktop or laptop computer where they started:

* A statistics student wants to cross-validate a model. This involves running
  the model 1000 times -- but each run takes an hour. Running the model on
  a laptop will take over a month! In this research problem, final results are
  calculated after all 1000 models have run, but typically only one model is
  run at a time (in __serial__) on the laptop. Since each of the 1000 runs is
  independent of all others, and given enough computers, it's theoretically
  possible to run them all at once (in __parallel__).
* A genomics researcher has been using small datasets of sequence data, but
  soon will be receiving a new type of sequencing data that is 10 times as
  large. It's already challenging to open the datasets on a computer --
  analyzing these larger datasets will probably crash it. In this research
  problem, the calculations required might be impossible to parallelize, but a
  computer with __more memory__ would be required to analyze the much larger
  future data set.
* An engineer is using a fluid dynamics package that has an option to run in
  parallel. So far, this option was not used on a desktop. In going from 2D
  to 3D simulations, the simulation time has more than tripled. It might be
  useful to take advantage of that option or feature. In this research problem,
  the calculations in each region of the simulation are largely independent of
  calculations in other regions of the simulation. It's possible to run each
  region's calculations simultaneously (in __parallel__), communicate selected
  results to adjacent regions as needed, and repeat the calculations to
  converge on a final set of results. In moving from a 2D to a 3D model, __both
  the amount of data and the amount of calculations increases greatly__, and
  it's theoretically possible to distribute the calculations across multiple
  computers communicating over a shared network.

In all these cases, access to more (and larger) computers is needed. Those
computers should be usable at the same time, __solving many researchers'
problems in parallel__.

::::challenge{id=never-used-server title="I've Never Used a Server, Have I?"}

Take a minute and think about which of your daily interactions with a
computer may require a remote server or even cluster to provide you with
results.

:::solution

## Some Ideas

* Checking email: your computer (possibly in your pocket) contacts a remote
  machine, authenticates, and downloads a list of new messages; it also
  uploads changes to message status, such as whether you read, marked as
  junk, or deleted the message. Since yours is not the only account, the
  mail server is probably one of many in a data center.
* Searching for a phrase online involves comparing your search term against
  a massive database of all known sites, looking for matches. This "query"
  operation can be straightforward, but building that database is a
  [monumental task][mapreduce]! Servers are involved at every step.
* Searching for directions on a mapping website involves connecting your
  (A) starting and (B) end points by [traversing a graph][dijkstra] in
  search of the "shortest" path by distance, time, expense, or another
  metric. Converting a map into the right form is relatively simple, but
  calculating all the possible routes between A and B is expensive.

Checking email could be serial: your machine connects to one server and
exchanges data. Searching by querying the database for your search term (or
endpoints) could also be serial, in that one machine receives your query
and returns the result. However, assembling and storing the full database
is far beyond the capability of any one machine. Therefore, these functions
are served in parallel by a large, ["hyperscale"][hyperscale] collection of
servers working together.
:::
::::

[dijkstra]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra%27s_algorithm
[hyperscale]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperscale_computing
[mapreduce]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce

Commit message:

Display learning objectives in the lessons (#127)
* add learning objectives for Continuous Integration lesson

* add learning objectives for collaboration lesson

* add learning objectives for Testing lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Scalability Profiling lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Intro

* fix typo

* add leraning objectives for object-oriented python

* add learning objectives for intro to bash

* add learning objectives for version control lesson

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/01_hpc_intro.md, after:

---
name: Why Use a Cluster?
dependsOn: []
tags: []
learningOutcomes:
  - Describe what an HPC system is.
  - Identify how an HPC system could benefit you.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Frequently, research problems that use computing can outgrow the capabilities
of the desktop or laptop computer where they started:

* A statistics student wants to cross-validate a model. This involves running
  the model 1000 times -- but each run takes an hour. Running the model on
  a laptop will take over a month! In this research problem, final results are
  calculated after all 1000 models have run, but typically only one model is
  run at a time (in __serial__) on the laptop. Since each of the 1000 runs is
  independent of all others, and given enough computers, it's theoretically
  possible to run them all at once (in __parallel__).
* A genomics researcher has been using small datasets of sequence data, but
  soon will be receiving a new type of sequencing data that is 10 times as
  large. It's already challenging to open the datasets on a computer --
  analyzing these larger datasets will probably crash it. In this research
  problem, the calculations required might be impossible to parallelize, but a
  computer with __more memory__ would be required to analyze the much larger
  future data set.
* An engineer is using a fluid dynamics package that has an option to run in
  parallel. So far, this option was not used on a desktop. In going from 2D
  to 3D simulations, the simulation time has more than tripled. It might be
  useful to take advantage of that option or feature. In this research problem,
  the calculations in each region of the simulation are largely independent of
  calculations in other regions of the simulation. It's possible to run each
  region's calculations simultaneously (in __parallel__), communicate selected
  results to adjacent regions as needed, and repeat the calculations to
  converge on a final set of results. In moving from a 2D to a 3D model, __both
  the amount of data and the amount of calculations increases greatly__, and
  it's theoretically possible to distribute the calculations across multiple
  computers communicating over a shared network.

In all these cases, access to more (and larger) computers is needed. Those
computers should be usable at the same time, __solving many researchers'
problems in parallel__.

::::challenge{id=never-used-server title="I've Never Used a Server, Have I?"}

Take a minute and think about which of your daily interactions with a
computer may require a remote server or even cluster to provide you with
results.

:::solution

## Some Ideas

* Checking email: your computer (possibly in your pocket) contacts a remote
  machine, authenticates, and downloads a list of new messages; it also
  uploads changes to message status, such as whether you read, marked as
  junk, or deleted the message. Since yours is not the only account, the
  mail server is probably one of many in a data center.
* Searching for a phrase online involves comparing your search term against
  a massive database of all known sites, looking for matches. This "query"
  operation can be straightforward, but building that database is a
  [monumental task][mapreduce]! Servers are involved at every step.
* Searching for directions on a mapping website involves connecting your
  (A) starting and (B) end points by [traversing a graph][dijkstra] in
  search of the "shortest" path by distance, time, expense, or another
  metric. Converting a map into the right form is relatively simple, but
  calculating all the possible routes between A and B is expensive.

Checking email could be serial: your machine connects to one server and
exchanges data. Searching by querying the database for your search term (or
endpoints) could also be serial, in that one machine receives your query
and returns the result. However, assembling and storing the full database
is far beyond the capability of any one machine. Therefore, these functions
are served in parallel by a large, ["hyperscale"][hyperscale] collection of
servers working together.
:::
::::

[dijkstra]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra%27s_algorithm
[hyperscale]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperscale_computing
[mapreduce]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce
