high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/02_connecting.md, before:

---
name: Connecting to Remote HPC systems
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.01_hpc_intro
]
tags: [ssh]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Secure Connections

The first step in using a cluster is to establish a connection from our laptop to the cluster. When we are sitting at a computer (or standing, or holding it in our hands or on our wrists), we have come to expect a visual display with icons, widgets, and perhaps some windows or applications: a _graphical user interface_, or GUI. Since computer clusters are remote resources that we connect to over slow or intermittent interfaces (WiFi and VPNs especially), it is more practical to use a _command-line interface_, or CLI, to send commands
as plain-text. If a command returns output, it is printed as plain text as well. The commands we run today will not open a window to show graphical results.

If you have ever opened the Windows Command Prompt or macOS Terminal, you have seen a CLI. If you have already taken The Carpentries' courses on the UNIX Shell or Version Control, you have used the CLI on your _local machine_ extensively. The only leap to be made here is to open a CLI on a _remote machine_, while taking some precautions so that other folks on the network can't see (or change) the commands you're running or the results the remote machine sends back. We will use the Secure SHell protocol (or SSH) to open an encrypted network connection between two machines, allowing you to send & receive text and data without having to worry about prying eyes.

![Connect to cluster](fig/connect-to-remote.svg)

SSH clients are usually command-line tools, where you provide the remote machine address as the only required argument. If your username on the remote system differs from what you use locally, you must provide that as well. If your SSH client has a graphical front-end, such as PuTTY or MobaXterm, you will set these arguments before clicking "connect." From the terminal, you'll write something like `ssh userName@hostname`, where the argument is just like an email address: the "@" symbol is used to separate the personal ID from the
address of the remote machine.

When logging in to a laptop, tablet, or other personal device, a username, password, or pattern are normally required to prevent unauthorized access. In these situations, the likelihood of somebody else intercepting your password is low, since logging your keystrokes requires a malicious exploit or physical access. For systems running an SSH server, anybody on the network can log in, or try to. Since usernames are often public or easy to guess, your password is often the weakest link in the security chain. Many clusters therefore forbid password-based login, requiring instead that you generate and configure a public-private key pair with a much stronger password. Even if your cluster does not require it, the next section will guide you through the use of SSH keys and an SSH agent to both strengthen your security _and_ make it more convenient to log in to remote systems.

### Better Security With SSH Keys

SSH keys are an alternative method for authentication to obtain access to remote computing systems. They can also be used for authentication when transferring files or for accessing remote version control systems (such as [GitHub][gh-ssh]). In this section you will create a pair of SSH keys:

* a private key which you keep on your own computer, and
* a public key which can be placed on any remote system you will access.

:::callout

## Private keys are your secure digital passport

A private key that is visible to anyone but you should be considered compromised, and must be destroyed. This includes having improper permissions on the directory it (or a copy) is stored in, traversing any network that is not secure (encrypted), attachment on unencrypted email, and even displaying the key on your terminal window.

Protect this key as if it unlocks your front door. In many ways, it does.
:::

Regardless of the software or operating system you use, _please_ choose a strong password or passphrase to act as another layer of protection for your private SSH key.

:::callout

## Considerations for SSH Key Passwords

When prompted, enter a strong password that you will remember. There are two
common approaches to this:

1. Create a memorable passphrase with some punctuation and number-for-letter substitutions, 32 characters or longer. Street addresses work well; just be careful of social engineering or public records attacks.
2. Use a password manager and its built-in password generator with all character classes, 25 characters or longer. [KeePass][keepass] and [BitWarden][bitwarden] are two good options.
3. Nothing is _less_ secure than a private key with no password. If you skipped password entry by accident, go back and generate a new key pair _with_ a strong password.

:::

### SSH Keys on Linux, Mac, MobaXterm, and Windows Subsystem for Linux

Once you have opened a terminal, check for existing SSH keys and filenames since existing SSH keys are overwritten.

```bash
ls ~/.ssh/
```

If `~/.ssh/id_ed25519` already exists, you will need to specify a different name for the new key-pair.

Generate a new public-private key pair using the following command, which will produce a stronger key than the `ssh-keygen` default by invoking these flags:

* `-a` (default is 16): number of rounds of passphrase derivation; increase to slow down brute force attacks.
* `-t` (default is [rsa][wiki-rsa]): specify the "type" or cryptographic algorithm. `ed25519` specifies [EdDSA][wiki-dsa] with a 256-bit key; it is faster than RSA with a comparable strength.
* `-f` (default is /home/user/.ssh/id_algorithm): filename to store your private key. The public key filename will be identical, with a `.pub` extension added.

```bash
ssh-keygen -a 100 -f ~/.ssh/id_ed25519 -t ed25519
```

When prompted, enter a strong password with the [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords). Note that the terminal will not appear to change while you type the password: this is deliberate, for your security. You will be prompted to type it again, so don't worry too much about typos.

Take a look in `~/.ssh` (use `ls ~/.ssh`). You should see two new files:

* your private key (`~/.ssh/id_ed25519`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

:::callout{variant="tip"}

## Use RSA for Older Systems

If key generation failed because ed25519 is not available, try using the older (but still strong and trustworthy) [RSA][wiki-rsa] cryptosystem. Again, first check for an existing key:

```bash
ls ~/.ssh/
```

If `~/.ssh/id_rsa` already exists, you will need to specify choose a different name for the new key-pair. Generate it as above, with the following extra flags:

* `-b` sets the number of bits in the key. The default is 2048. EdDSA uses a fixed key length, so this flag would have no effect.
* `-o` (no default): use the OpenSSH key format, rather than PEM.

```bash
ssh-keygen -a 100 -b 4096 -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa -o -t rsa
```

When prompted, enter a strong password with the [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords).

Take a look in `~/.ssh` (use `ls ~/.ssh`). You should see two new files:

* your private key (`~/.ssh/id_rsa`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

:::

### SSH Keys on PuTTY

If you are using PuTTY on Windows, download and use `puttygen` to generate the key pair. See the [PuTTY documentation][putty-gen] for details.

* Select `EdDSA` as the key type.
* Select `255` as the key size or strength.
* Click on the "Generate" button.
* You do not need to enter a comment.
* When prompted, enter a strong password with the
  [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords).
* Save the keys in a folder no other users of the system can read.

Take a look in the folder you specified. You should see two new files:

* your private key (`id_ed25519`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`id_ed25519.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

### SSH Agent for Easier Key Handling

An SSH key is only as strong as the password used to unlock it, but on the other hand, typing out a complex password every time you connect to a machine is tedious and gets old very fast. This is where the [SSH Agent][ssh-agent] comes in.

Using an SSH Agent, you can type your password for the private key once, then have the Agent remember it for some number of hours or until you log off. Unless some nefarious actor has physical access to your machine, this keeps the password safe, and removes the tedium of entering the password multiple times.

Just remember your password, because once it expires in the Agent, you have to type it in again.

#### SSH Agents on Linux, macOS, and Windows

Open your terminal application and check if an agent is running:

```bash
ssh-add -l
```

If you get a list, or a message like:

```text
The agent has no identities
```

Then everything is fine! If you get an error like the ones below one:

```text
Error connecting to agent: No such file or directory
# or
Could not open a connection to your authentication agent.
```

... then your SSH agent isn't running and you need to start it as:

```bash
eval $(ssh-agent)
```
  
:::callout

## What's In A `$(...)`?

The syntax of this SSH Agent command is unusual, based on what we've seen in the UNIX Shell lesson. This is because the `ssh-agent` command creates a connection that only you have access to, and prints a series of shell commands that can be used to reach it -- but _does not execute them!_
  
```bash
ssh-agent
```

```text
SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/tmp/ssh-Zvvga2Y8kQZN/agent.131521;
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK;
SSH_AGENT_PID=131522;
export SSH_AGENT_PID;
echo Agent pid 131522;
```

The `eval` command interprets this text output as commands and allows you to access the SSH Agent connection you just created.
  
You could run each line of the `ssh-agent` output yourself, and achieve the same result. Using `eval` just makes this easier.
:::

Add your key to the agent, with session expiration after 8 hours:

```bash
ssh-add -t 8h ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
```

```text
Enter passphrase for .ssh/id_ed25519: 
Identity added: .ssh/id_ed25519
Lifetime set to 86400 seconds
```

For the duration (8 hours), whenever you use that key, the SSH Agent will provide the key on your behalf without you having to type a single keystroke.

### SSH Agent on PuTTY

If you are using PuTTY on Windows, download and use `pageant` as the SSH agent. See the [PuTTY documentation][putty-agent].

### Transfer Your Public Key

Use the **s**ecure **c**o**p**y tool to send your public key to the cluster.

```bash
scp ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub user@cluster.name:~/
```

where `user` is your username, and `cluster.name` is the hostname of the remote cluster. Replace these with the username and hostname supplied by the instructors.

## Log In to the Cluster

Go ahead and open your terminal or graphical SSH client, then log in to the cluster.

```bash
ssh user@cluster.name
```

You may be asked for your password. Watch out: the characters you type after the password prompt are not displayed on the screen. Normal output will resume once you press `Enter`.

You may have noticed that the prompt changed when you logged into the remote system using the terminal (if you logged in using PuTTY this will not apply because it does not offer a local terminal). This change is important because it can help you distinguish on which system the commands you type will be run when you pass them into the terminal. This change is also a small complication that we will need to navigate throughout the workshop. Exactly what is displayed as the prompt (which conventionally ends in `$`) in the terminal when it is connected to the local system and the remote system will typically be different for every user. We still need to indicate which system we are entering commands on though so we will adopt the following convention:

* `local$` when the command is to be entered on a terminal connected to your local computer
* `remote$` when the command is to be entered on a terminal connected to the remote system
* `$` when it really doesn't matter which system the terminal is connected to.

## Looking Around Your Remote Home

Very often, many users are tempted to think of a high-performance computing installation as one giant, magical machine. Sometimes, people will assume that the computer they've logged onto is the entire computing cluster. So what's really happening? What computer have we logged on to? The name of the current computer we are logged onto can be checked with the `hostname` command. (You may also notice that the current hostname is also part of our prompt!)

```bash
remote$ hostname
```

```text
cluster.name
```

So, we're definitely on the remote machine. Next, let's find out where we are by running `pwd` to **p**rint the **w**orking **d**irectory.

```bash
remote$ pwd
```

```text
/home/user
```

Great, we know where we are! Let's see what's in our current directory:

```bash
remote$ ls
```

```text
id_ed25519.pub
```

The system administrators may have configured your home directory with some helpful files, folders, and links (shortcuts) to space reserved for you on other filesystems. If they did not, your home directory may appear empty. To double-check, include hidden files in your directory listing:

```bash
remote$ ls -a
```

```text
  .            .bashrc           id_ed25519.pub
  ..           .ssh
```

In the first column, `.` is a reference to the current directory and `..` a reference to its parent (your home directory). You may or may not see the other files, or files like them: `.bashrc` is a shell configuration file, which you can edit with your preferences; and `.ssh` is a directory storing SSH keys and a record of authorized connections.

### Install Your SSH Key

:::callout

## There May Be a Better Way

Policies and practices for handling SSH keys vary between HPC clusters: follow any guidance provided by the cluster administrators or documentation. In particular, if there is an online portal for managing SSH keys, use that instead of the directions outlined here.
:::

If you transferred your SSH public key with `scp`, you should see `id_ed25519.pub` in your home directory. To "install" this key, it must be listed in a file named `authorized_keys` under the `.ssh` folder.

If the `.ssh` folder was not listed above, then it does not yet exist: create it.

```bash
remote$ mkdir ~/.ssh
```

Now, use `cat` to print your public key, but redirect the output, appending it to the `authorized_keys` file:

```bash
remote$ cat ~/id_ed25519.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

That's all! Disconnect, then try to log back into the remote: if your key and agent have been configured correctly, you should not be prompted for the password for your SSH key.

```bash
remote$ logout
```

```bash
local$ ssh user@cluster.name
```

[bitwarden]: https://bitwarden.com
[gh-ssh]: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh
[keepass]: https://keepass.info
[putty-gen]: https://tartarus.org/~simon/putty-prerel-snapshots/htmldoc/Chapter8.html#pubkey-puttygen
[putty-agent]: https://tartarus.org/~simon/putty-prerel-snapshots/htmldoc/Chapter9.html#pageant
[ssh-agent]: https://www.ssh.com/academy/ssh/agent
[wiki-rsa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem)
[wiki-dsa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA

Commit message:

Display learning objectives in the lessons (#127)
* add learning objectives for Continuous Integration lesson

* add learning objectives for collaboration lesson

* add learning objectives for Testing lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Scalability Profiling lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Intro

* fix typo

* add leraning objectives for object-oriented python

* add learning objectives for intro to bash

* add learning objectives for version control lesson

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/02_connecting.md, after:

---
name: Connecting to Remote HPC systems
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.01_hpc_intro
]
tags: [ssh]
learningOutcomes:
  - Configure secure access to a remote HPC system.
  - Connect to a remote HPC system.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Secure Connections

The first step in using a cluster is to establish a connection from our laptop to the cluster. When we are sitting at a computer (or standing, or holding it in our hands or on our wrists), we have come to expect a visual display with icons, widgets, and perhaps some windows or applications: a _graphical user interface_, or GUI. Since computer clusters are remote resources that we connect to over slow or intermittent interfaces (WiFi and VPNs especially), it is more practical to use a _command-line interface_, or CLI, to send commands
as plain-text. If a command returns output, it is printed as plain text as well. The commands we run today will not open a window to show graphical results.

If you have ever opened the Windows Command Prompt or macOS Terminal, you have seen a CLI. If you have already taken The Carpentries' courses on the UNIX Shell or Version Control, you have used the CLI on your _local machine_ extensively. The only leap to be made here is to open a CLI on a _remote machine_, while taking some precautions so that other folks on the network can't see (or change) the commands you're running or the results the remote machine sends back. We will use the Secure SHell protocol (or SSH) to open an encrypted network connection between two machines, allowing you to send & receive text and data without having to worry about prying eyes.

![Connect to cluster](fig/connect-to-remote.svg)

SSH clients are usually command-line tools, where you provide the remote machine address as the only required argument. If your username on the remote system differs from what you use locally, you must provide that as well. If your SSH client has a graphical front-end, such as PuTTY or MobaXterm, you will set these arguments before clicking "connect." From the terminal, you'll write something like `ssh userName@hostname`, where the argument is just like an email address: the "@" symbol is used to separate the personal ID from the
address of the remote machine.

When logging in to a laptop, tablet, or other personal device, a username, password, or pattern are normally required to prevent unauthorized access. In these situations, the likelihood of somebody else intercepting your password is low, since logging your keystrokes requires a malicious exploit or physical access. For systems running an SSH server, anybody on the network can log in, or try to. Since usernames are often public or easy to guess, your password is often the weakest link in the security chain. Many clusters therefore forbid password-based login, requiring instead that you generate and configure a public-private key pair with a much stronger password. Even if your cluster does not require it, the next section will guide you through the use of SSH keys and an SSH agent to both strengthen your security _and_ make it more convenient to log in to remote systems.

### Better Security With SSH Keys

SSH keys are an alternative method for authentication to obtain access to remote computing systems. They can also be used for authentication when transferring files or for accessing remote version control systems (such as [GitHub][gh-ssh]). In this section you will create a pair of SSH keys:

* a private key which you keep on your own computer, and
* a public key which can be placed on any remote system you will access.

:::callout

## Private keys are your secure digital passport

A private key that is visible to anyone but you should be considered compromised, and must be destroyed. This includes having improper permissions on the directory it (or a copy) is stored in, traversing any network that is not secure (encrypted), attachment on unencrypted email, and even displaying the key on your terminal window.

Protect this key as if it unlocks your front door. In many ways, it does.
:::

Regardless of the software or operating system you use, _please_ choose a strong password or passphrase to act as another layer of protection for your private SSH key.

:::callout

## Considerations for SSH Key Passwords

When prompted, enter a strong password that you will remember. There are two
common approaches to this:

1. Create a memorable passphrase with some punctuation and number-for-letter substitutions, 32 characters or longer. Street addresses work well; just be careful of social engineering or public records attacks.
2. Use a password manager and its built-in password generator with all character classes, 25 characters or longer. [KeePass][keepass] and [BitWarden][bitwarden] are two good options.
3. Nothing is _less_ secure than a private key with no password. If you skipped password entry by accident, go back and generate a new key pair _with_ a strong password.

:::

### SSH Keys on Linux, Mac, MobaXterm, and Windows Subsystem for Linux

Once you have opened a terminal, check for existing SSH keys and filenames since existing SSH keys are overwritten.

```bash
ls ~/.ssh/
```

If `~/.ssh/id_ed25519` already exists, you will need to specify a different name for the new key-pair.

Generate a new public-private key pair using the following command, which will produce a stronger key than the `ssh-keygen` default by invoking these flags:

* `-a` (default is 16): number of rounds of passphrase derivation; increase to slow down brute force attacks.
* `-t` (default is [rsa][wiki-rsa]): specify the "type" or cryptographic algorithm. `ed25519` specifies [EdDSA][wiki-dsa] with a 256-bit key; it is faster than RSA with a comparable strength.
* `-f` (default is /home/user/.ssh/id_algorithm): filename to store your private key. The public key filename will be identical, with a `.pub` extension added.

```bash
ssh-keygen -a 100 -f ~/.ssh/id_ed25519 -t ed25519
```

When prompted, enter a strong password with the [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords). Note that the terminal will not appear to change while you type the password: this is deliberate, for your security. You will be prompted to type it again, so don't worry too much about typos.

Take a look in `~/.ssh` (use `ls ~/.ssh`). You should see two new files:

* your private key (`~/.ssh/id_ed25519`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

:::callout{variant="tip"}

## Use RSA for Older Systems

If key generation failed because ed25519 is not available, try using the older (but still strong and trustworthy) [RSA][wiki-rsa] cryptosystem. Again, first check for an existing key:

```bash
ls ~/.ssh/
```

If `~/.ssh/id_rsa` already exists, you will need to specify choose a different name for the new key-pair. Generate it as above, with the following extra flags:

* `-b` sets the number of bits in the key. The default is 2048. EdDSA uses a fixed key length, so this flag would have no effect.
* `-o` (no default): use the OpenSSH key format, rather than PEM.

```bash
ssh-keygen -a 100 -b 4096 -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa -o -t rsa
```

When prompted, enter a strong password with the [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords).

Take a look in `~/.ssh` (use `ls ~/.ssh`). You should see two new files:

* your private key (`~/.ssh/id_rsa`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

:::

### SSH Keys on PuTTY

If you are using PuTTY on Windows, download and use `puttygen` to generate the key pair. See the [PuTTY documentation][putty-gen] for details.

* Select `EdDSA` as the key type.
* Select `255` as the key size or strength.
* Click on the "Generate" button.
* You do not need to enter a comment.
* When prompted, enter a strong password with the
  [above considerations in mind](#considerations-for-ssh-key-passwords).
* Save the keys in a folder no other users of the system can read.

Take a look in the folder you specified. You should see two new files:

* your private key (`id_ed25519`): _do not share with anyone!_
* the shareable public key (`id_ed25519.pub`): if a system administrator asks for a key, this is the one to send. It is also safe to upload to websites such as GitHub: it is meant to be seen.

### SSH Agent for Easier Key Handling

An SSH key is only as strong as the password used to unlock it, but on the other hand, typing out a complex password every time you connect to a machine is tedious and gets old very fast. This is where the [SSH Agent][ssh-agent] comes in.

Using an SSH Agent, you can type your password for the private key once, then have the Agent remember it for some number of hours or until you log off. Unless some nefarious actor has physical access to your machine, this keeps the password safe, and removes the tedium of entering the password multiple times.

Just remember your password, because once it expires in the Agent, you have to type it in again.

#### SSH Agents on Linux, macOS, and Windows

Open your terminal application and check if an agent is running:

```bash
ssh-add -l
```

If you get a list, or a message like:

```text
The agent has no identities
```

Then everything is fine! If you get an error like the ones below one:

```text
Error connecting to agent: No such file or directory
# or
Could not open a connection to your authentication agent.
```

... then your SSH agent isn't running and you need to start it as:

```bash
eval $(ssh-agent)
```
  
:::callout

## What's In A `$(...)`?

The syntax of this SSH Agent command is unusual, based on what we've seen in the UNIX Shell lesson. This is because the `ssh-agent` command creates a connection that only you have access to, and prints a series of shell commands that can be used to reach it -- but _does not execute them!_
  
```bash
ssh-agent
```

```text
SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/tmp/ssh-Zvvga2Y8kQZN/agent.131521;
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK;
SSH_AGENT_PID=131522;
export SSH_AGENT_PID;
echo Agent pid 131522;
```

The `eval` command interprets this text output as commands and allows you to access the SSH Agent connection you just created.
  
You could run each line of the `ssh-agent` output yourself, and achieve the same result. Using `eval` just makes this easier.
:::

Add your key to the agent, with session expiration after 8 hours:

```bash
ssh-add -t 8h ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
```

```text
Enter passphrase for .ssh/id_ed25519: 
Identity added: .ssh/id_ed25519
Lifetime set to 86400 seconds
```

For the duration (8 hours), whenever you use that key, the SSH Agent will provide the key on your behalf without you having to type a single keystroke.

### SSH Agent on PuTTY

If you are using PuTTY on Windows, download and use `pageant` as the SSH agent. See the [PuTTY documentation][putty-agent].

### Transfer Your Public Key

Use the **s**ecure **c**o**p**y tool to send your public key to the cluster.

```bash
scp ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub user@cluster.name:~/
```

where `user` is your username, and `cluster.name` is the hostname of the remote cluster. Replace these with the username and hostname supplied by the instructors.

## Log In to the Cluster

Go ahead and open your terminal or graphical SSH client, then log in to the cluster.

```bash
ssh user@cluster.name
```

You may be asked for your password. Watch out: the characters you type after the password prompt are not displayed on the screen. Normal output will resume once you press `Enter`.

You may have noticed that the prompt changed when you logged into the remote system using the terminal (if you logged in using PuTTY this will not apply because it does not offer a local terminal). This change is important because it can help you distinguish on which system the commands you type will be run when you pass them into the terminal. This change is also a small complication that we will need to navigate throughout the workshop. Exactly what is displayed as the prompt (which conventionally ends in `$`) in the terminal when it is connected to the local system and the remote system will typically be different for every user. We still need to indicate which system we are entering commands on though so we will adopt the following convention:

* `local$` when the command is to be entered on a terminal connected to your local computer
* `remote$` when the command is to be entered on a terminal connected to the remote system
* `$` when it really doesn't matter which system the terminal is connected to.

## Looking Around Your Remote Home

Very often, many users are tempted to think of a high-performance computing installation as one giant, magical machine. Sometimes, people will assume that the computer they've logged onto is the entire computing cluster. So what's really happening? What computer have we logged on to? The name of the current computer we are logged onto can be checked with the `hostname` command. (You may also notice that the current hostname is also part of our prompt!)

```bash
remote$ hostname
```

```text
cluster.name
```

So, we're definitely on the remote machine. Next, let's find out where we are by running `pwd` to **p**rint the **w**orking **d**irectory.

```bash
remote$ pwd
```

```text
/home/user
```

Great, we know where we are! Let's see what's in our current directory:

```bash
remote$ ls
```

```text
id_ed25519.pub
```

The system administrators may have configured your home directory with some helpful files, folders, and links (shortcuts) to space reserved for you on other filesystems. If they did not, your home directory may appear empty. To double-check, include hidden files in your directory listing:

```bash
remote$ ls -a
```

```text
  .            .bashrc           id_ed25519.pub
  ..           .ssh
```

In the first column, `.` is a reference to the current directory and `..` a reference to its parent (your home directory). You may or may not see the other files, or files like them: `.bashrc` is a shell configuration file, which you can edit with your preferences; and `.ssh` is a directory storing SSH keys and a record of authorized connections.

### Install Your SSH Key

:::callout

## There May Be a Better Way

Policies and practices for handling SSH keys vary between HPC clusters: follow any guidance provided by the cluster administrators or documentation. In particular, if there is an online portal for managing SSH keys, use that instead of the directions outlined here.
:::

If you transferred your SSH public key with `scp`, you should see `id_ed25519.pub` in your home directory. To "install" this key, it must be listed in a file named `authorized_keys` under the `.ssh` folder.

If the `.ssh` folder was not listed above, then it does not yet exist: create it.

```bash
remote$ mkdir ~/.ssh
```

Now, use `cat` to print your public key, but redirect the output, appending it to the `authorized_keys` file:

```bash
remote$ cat ~/id_ed25519.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

That's all! Disconnect, then try to log back into the remote: if your key and agent have been configured correctly, you should not be prompted for the password for your SSH key.

```bash
remote$ logout
```

```bash
local$ ssh user@cluster.name
```

[bitwarden]: https://bitwarden.com
[gh-ssh]: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh
[keepass]: https://keepass.info
[putty-gen]: https://tartarus.org/~simon/putty-prerel-snapshots/htmldoc/Chapter8.html#pubkey-puttygen
[putty-agent]: https://tartarus.org/~simon/putty-prerel-snapshots/htmldoc/Chapter9.html#pageant
[ssh-agent]: https://www.ssh.com/academy/ssh/agent
[wiki-rsa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem)
[wiki-dsa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA
