high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/03_cluster.md, before:

---
name: "Exploring Remote Resources"
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.02_connecting
]
tags: [ARC]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Look Around the Remote System

If you have not already connected to `cluster.name`, please do so now:

```bash
local$  ssh user@cluster.name
```

Take a look at your home directory on the remote system:

```bash
remote$ ls
```

::::challenge{id=difference-remote title="What's different between your machine and the remote?"}

Open a second terminal window on your local computer and run the `ls` command
(without logging in to cluster.name). What differences do you see?

:::solution

You would likely see something more like this:

```bash
local$ ls
```

```
Applications Documents    Library      Music        Public
Desktop      Downloads    Movies       Pictures
```

The remote computer's home directory shares almost nothing in common with
the local computer: they are completely separate systems!
:::
::::

Most high-performance computing systems run the Linux operating system, which
is built around the UNIX [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][fshs]. Instead of
having a separate root for each hard drive or storage medium, all files and
devices are anchored to the "root" directory, which is `/`:

```bash
remote$ ls /
```

```
bin   etc   lib64  proc  sbin     sys  var
boot  home  mnt    root  scratch  tmp  working
dev   lib   opt    run   srv      usr
```

The "home" directory is the one where we generally want to keep all of our files. Other
folders on a UNIX OS contain system files and change as you install new software or
upgrade your OS.

:::callout
## Using HPC filesystems

On HPC systems, you have a number of places where you can store your files.
These differ in both the amount of space allocated and whether or not they
are backed up.

* __Home__ -- often a _network filesystem_, data stored here is available
  throughout the HPC system, and often backed up periodically. Files stored
  here are typically slower to access, the data is actually stored on another
  computer and is being transmitted and made available over the network!
* __Scratch__ -- typically faster than the networked Home directory, but not
  usually backed up, and should not be used for long term storage.
* __Work__ -- sometimes provided as an alternative to Scratch space, Work is
  a fast file system accessed over the network. Typically, this will have
  higher performance than your home directory, but lower performance than
  Scratch; it may not be backed up. It differs from Scratch space in that
  files in a work file system are not automatically deleted for you: you must
  manage the space yourself.
  :::

## Nodes

Individual computers that compose a cluster are typically called _nodes_
(although you will also hear people call them _servers_, _computers_ and
_machines_). On a cluster, there are different types of nodes for different
types of tasks. The node where you are right now is called the _login node_,
_head node_, _landing pad_, or _submit node_. A login node serves as an access
point to the cluster.

As a gateway, the login node should not be used for time-consuming or
resource-intensive tasks. You should be alert to this, and check with your
site's operators or documentation for details of what is and isn't allowed. It
is well suited for uploading and downloading files, setting up software, and
running tests. Generally speaking, in these lessons, we will avoid running jobs
on the login node.

Who else is logged in to the login node?

```bash
remote$ who
```

This may show only your user ID, but there are likely several other people
(including fellow learners) connected right now.

:::callout
## Dedicated Transfer Nodes

If you want to transfer larger amounts of data to or from the cluster, some
systems offer dedicated nodes for data transfers only. The motivation for
this lies in the fact that larger data transfers should not obstruct
operation of the login node for anybody else. Check with your cluster's
documentation or its support team if such a transfer node is available. As a
rule of thumb, consider all transfers of a volume larger than 500 MB to 1 GB
as large. But these numbers change, e.g., depending on the network connection
of yourself and of your cluster or other factors.
:::

The real work on a cluster gets done by the _compute_ (or _worker_) _nodes_.
compute nodes come in many shapes and sizes, but generally are dedicated to long
or hard tasks that require a lot of computational resources.

All interaction with the compute nodes is handled by a specialized piece of
software called a scheduler. We'll learn more about how to use the
scheduler to submit jobs next, but for now, it can also tell us more
information about the compute nodes.

For example, we can view all of the compute nodes by running the command
`sinfo`.

```bash
remote$ sinfo
```

```
PARTITION AVAIL  TIMELIMIT  NODES  STATE NODELIST
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      1 drain* gra259
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     11  down* gra[8,99,211,268,376,635,647,803,85...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      1   drng gra272
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     31   comp gra[988-991,994-1002,1006-1007,1015...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     33  drain gra[225-251,253-256,677,1026]
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    323    mix gra[7,13,25,41,43-44,56,58-77,107-1...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    464  alloc gra[1-6,9-12,14-19,21-24,26-40,42,4...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    176   idle gra[78-98,123-124,128-162,170-172,2...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      3   down gra[20,801,937]
```

A lot of the nodes are busy running work for other users: we are not alone
here!

There are also specialized machines used for managing disk storage, user
authentication, and other infrastructure-related tasks. Although we do not
typically logon to or interact with these machines directly, they enable a
number of key features like ensuring our user account and files are available
throughout the HPC system.

## What's in a Node?

All of the nodes in an HPC system have the same components as your own laptop
or desktop: _CPUs_ (sometimes also called _processors_ or _cores_), _memory_
(or _RAM_), and _disk_ space. CPUs are a computer's tool for actually running
programs and calculations. Information about a current task is stored in the
computer's memory. Disk refers to all storage that can be accessed like a file
system. This is generally storage that can hold data permanently, i.e. data is
still there even if the computer has been restarted. While this storage can be
local (a hard drive installed inside of it), it is more common for nodes to
connect to a shared, remote fileserver or cluster of servers.

![Node anatomy](fig/node_anatomy.png)

::::challenge{id=explore-local title="Explore Your Computer"}

Try to find out the number of CPUs and amount of memory available on your
personal computer.

Note that, if you're logged in to the remote computer cluster, you need to
log out first. To do so, type `Ctrl+d` or `exit`:

```bash
remote$ exit
local$
```

:::solution

There are several ways to do this. Most operating systems have a graphical
system monitor, like the Windows Task Manager. More detailed information
can be found on the command line:

* Run system utilities
  ```
  local$ nproc --all
  local$ free -m
  ```
  {: .language-bash}

* Read from `/proc`
  ```
  local$ cat /proc/cpuinfo
  local$ cat /proc/meminfo
  ```
  {: .language-bash}

* Run system monitor
  ```
  local$ htop
  ```
  {: .language-bash}
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=explore-remote title="Explore the Login Node"}

Now compare the resources of your computer with those of the login node.

:::solution

```bash
local$ ssh user@cluster.name
remote$ nproc --all
remote$ free -m
```

You can get more information about the processors using `lscpu`,
and a lot of detail about the memory by reading the file `/proc/meminfo`:

```bash
remote$ less /proc/meminfo
```

You can also explore the available filesystems using `df` to show **d**isk
**f**ree space. The `-h` flag renders the sizes in a human-friendly format,
i.e., GB instead of B. The **t**ype flag `-T` shows what kind of filesystem
each resource is.

```bash
remote$ df -Th
```

## Different results from `df`

* The local filesystems (ext, tmp, xfs, zfs) will depend on whether
  you're on the same login node (or compute node, later on).
* Networked filesystems (beegfs, cifs, gpfs, nfs, pvfs) will be similar
  -- but may include {{ site.remote.user }}, depending on how it
  is [mounted][mount].

## Shared Filesystems

This is an important point to remember: files saved on one node
(computer) are often available everywhere on the cluster!

:::
::::


::::challenge{id=compare-local-remote title="Compare Your Computer, the Login Node and the Compute Node"}

Compare your laptop's number of processors and memory with the numbers you
see on the cluster login node and compute node. What implications do
you think the differences might have on running your research work on the
different systems and nodes?


:::solution
Compute nodes are usually built with processors that have _higher
core-counts_ than the login node or personal computers in order to support
highly parallel tasks. Compute nodes usually also have substantially _more
memory (RAM)_ installed than a personal computer. More cores tends to help
jobs that depend on some work that is easy to perform in _parallel_, and
more, faster memory is key for large or _complex numerical tasks_.
:::
::::

:::callout
## Differences Between Nodes

Many HPC clusters have a variety of nodes optimized for particular workloads.
Some nodes may have larger amount of memory, or specialized resources such as
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs or "video cards").
:::

With all of this in mind, we will now cover how to talk to the cluster's
scheduler, and use it to start running our scripts and programs!

[fshs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard
[mount]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_(computing)

Commit message:

#14 add mac commands for exploring local resources

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/03_cluster.md, after:

---
name: "Exploring Remote Resources"
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.02_connecting
]
tags: [ARC]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Look Around the Remote System

If you have not already connected to `cluster.name`, please do so now:

```bash
local$  ssh user@cluster.name
```

Take a look at your home directory on the remote system:

```bash
remote$ ls
```

::::challenge{id=difference-remote title="What's different between your machine and the remote?"}

Open a second terminal window on your local computer and run the `ls` command
(without logging in to cluster.name). What differences do you see?

:::solution

You would likely see something more like this:

```bash
local$ ls
```

```
Applications Documents    Library      Music        Public
Desktop      Downloads    Movies       Pictures
```

The remote computer's home directory shares almost nothing in common with
the local computer: they are completely separate systems!
:::
::::

Most high-performance computing systems run the Linux operating system, which
is built around the UNIX [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][fshs]. Instead of
having a separate root for each hard drive or storage medium, all files and
devices are anchored to the "root" directory, which is `/`:

```bash
remote$ ls /
```

```
bin   etc   lib64  proc  sbin     sys  var
boot  home  mnt    root  scratch  tmp  working
dev   lib   opt    run   srv      usr
```

The "home" directory is the one where we generally want to keep all of our files. Other
folders on a UNIX OS contain system files and change as you install new software or
upgrade your OS.

:::callout
## Using HPC filesystems

On HPC systems, you have a number of places where you can store your files.
These differ in both the amount of space allocated and whether or not they
are backed up.

* __Home__ -- often a _network filesystem_, data stored here is available
  throughout the HPC system, and often backed up periodically. Files stored
  here are typically slower to access, the data is actually stored on another
  computer and is being transmitted and made available over the network!
* __Scratch__ -- typically faster than the networked Home directory, but not
  usually backed up, and should not be used for long term storage.
* __Work__ -- sometimes provided as an alternative to Scratch space, Work is
  a fast file system accessed over the network. Typically, this will have
  higher performance than your home directory, but lower performance than
  Scratch; it may not be backed up. It differs from Scratch space in that
  files in a work file system are not automatically deleted for you: you must
  manage the space yourself.
  :::

## Nodes

Individual computers that compose a cluster are typically called _nodes_
(although you will also hear people call them _servers_, _computers_ and
_machines_). On a cluster, there are different types of nodes for different
types of tasks. The node where you are right now is called the _login node_,
_head node_, _landing pad_, or _submit node_. A login node serves as an access
point to the cluster.

As a gateway, the login node should not be used for time-consuming or
resource-intensive tasks. You should be alert to this, and check with your
site's operators or documentation for details of what is and isn't allowed. It
is well suited for uploading and downloading files, setting up software, and
running tests. Generally speaking, in these lessons, we will avoid running jobs
on the login node.

Who else is logged in to the login node?

```bash
remote$ who
```

This may show only your user ID, but there are likely several other people
(including fellow learners) connected right now.

:::callout
## Dedicated Transfer Nodes

If you want to transfer larger amounts of data to or from the cluster, some
systems offer dedicated nodes for data transfers only. The motivation for
this lies in the fact that larger data transfers should not obstruct
operation of the login node for anybody else. Check with your cluster's
documentation or its support team if such a transfer node is available. As a
rule of thumb, consider all transfers of a volume larger than 500 MB to 1 GB
as large. But these numbers change, e.g., depending on the network connection
of yourself and of your cluster or other factors.
:::

The real work on a cluster gets done by the _compute_ (or _worker_) _nodes_.
compute nodes come in many shapes and sizes, but generally are dedicated to long
or hard tasks that require a lot of computational resources.

All interaction with the compute nodes is handled by a specialized piece of
software called a scheduler. We'll learn more about how to use the
scheduler to submit jobs next, but for now, it can also tell us more
information about the compute nodes.

For example, we can view all of the compute nodes by running the command
`sinfo`.

```bash
remote$ sinfo
```

```
PARTITION AVAIL  TIMELIMIT  NODES  STATE NODELIST
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      1 drain* gra259
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     11  down* gra[8,99,211,268,376,635,647,803,85...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      1   drng gra272
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     31   comp gra[988-991,994-1002,1006-1007,1015...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00     33  drain gra[225-251,253-256,677,1026]
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    323    mix gra[7,13,25,41,43-44,56,58-77,107-1...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    464  alloc gra[1-6,9-12,14-19,21-24,26-40,42,4...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00    176   idle gra[78-98,123-124,128-162,170-172,2...
compute*     up 7-00:00:00      3   down gra[20,801,937]
```

A lot of the nodes are busy running work for other users: we are not alone
here!

There are also specialized machines used for managing disk storage, user
authentication, and other infrastructure-related tasks. Although we do not
typically logon to or interact with these machines directly, they enable a
number of key features like ensuring our user account and files are available
throughout the HPC system.

## What's in a Node?

All of the nodes in an HPC system have the same components as your own laptop
or desktop: _CPUs_ (sometimes also called _processors_ or _cores_), _memory_
(or _RAM_), and _disk_ space. CPUs are a computer's tool for actually running
programs and calculations. Information about a current task is stored in the
computer's memory. Disk refers to all storage that can be accessed like a file
system. This is generally storage that can hold data permanently, i.e. data is
still there even if the computer has been restarted. While this storage can be
local (a hard drive installed inside of it), it is more common for nodes to
connect to a shared, remote fileserver or cluster of servers.

![Node anatomy](fig/node_anatomy.png)

::::challenge{id=explore-local title="Explore Your Computer"}

Try to find out the number of CPUs and amount of memory available on your
personal computer.

Note that, if you're logged in to the remote computer cluster, you need to
log out first. To do so, type `Ctrl+d` or `exit`:

```bash
remote$ exit
local$
```

:::solution

There are several ways to do this. Most operating systems have a graphical
system monitor, like the Windows Task Manager. More detailed information
can be found on the command line.

In a Linux environment, you can use the following commands:

* Run system utilities
  ```bash
  local$ nproc --all
  local$ free -m
  ```

* Read from `/proc`
  ```bash
  local$ cat /proc/cpuinfo
  local$ cat /proc/meminfo
  ```


  ```
:::

In a macOS environment, you can use the following to get the number of cpus and
amount of free memory

```bash
sysctl -n hw.ncpu
vm_stat | awk '/free/ {getline; print "Free memory: " $3 * 4096 / 1048576 " MB"}'
```

In both Linux and macOS, you can use system monitors such as the built in `top`,
or install `htop` using `apt` in Ubuntu or `brew` in macOS.

```bash
local$ top
local$ htop
```
::::

::::challenge{id=explore-remote title="Explore the Login Node"}

Now compare the resources of your computer with those of the login node.

:::solution

```bash
local$ ssh user@cluster.name
remote$ nproc --all
remote$ free -m
```

You can get more information about the processors using `lscpu`,
and a lot of detail about the memory by reading the file `/proc/meminfo`:

```bash
remote$ less /proc/meminfo
```

You can also explore the available filesystems using `df` to show **d**isk
**f**ree space. The `-h` flag renders the sizes in a human-friendly format,
i.e., GB instead of B. The **t**ype flag `-T` shows what kind of filesystem
each resource is.

```bash
remote$ df -Th
```

## Different results from `df`

* The local filesystems (ext, tmp, xfs, zfs) will depend on whether
  you're on the same login node (or compute node, later on).
* Networked filesystems (beegfs, cifs, gpfs, nfs, pvfs) will be similar
  -- but may include {{ site.remote.user }}, depending on how it
  is [mounted][mount].

## Shared Filesystems

This is an important point to remember: files saved on one node
(computer) are often available everywhere on the cluster!

:::
::::


::::challenge{id=compare-local-remote title="Compare Your Computer, the Login Node and the Compute Node"}

Compare your laptop's number of processors and memory with the numbers you
see on the cluster login node and compute node. What implications do
you think the differences might have on running your research work on the
different systems and nodes?


:::solution
Compute nodes are usually built with processors that have _higher
core-counts_ than the login node or personal computers in order to support
highly parallel tasks. Compute nodes usually also have substantially _more
memory (RAM)_ installed than a personal computer. More cores tends to help
jobs that depend on some work that is easy to perform in _parallel_, and
more, faster memory is key for large or _complex numerical tasks_.
:::
::::

:::callout
## Differences Between Nodes

Many HPC clusters have a variety of nodes optimized for particular workloads.
Some nodes may have larger amount of memory, or specialized resources such as
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs or "video cards").
:::

With all of this in mind, we will now cover how to talk to the cluster's
scheduler, and use it to start running our scripts and programs!

[fshs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard
[mount]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_(computing)
