high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/04_scheduler.md, before:

---
name: Introduction to Job Scheduling
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.03_cluster
]
tags: [slurm, ARC]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Job Scheduler

An HPC system might have thousands of nodes and thousands of users. How do we
decide who gets what and when? How do we ensure that a task is run with the
resources it needs? This job is handled by a special piece of software called
the _scheduler_. On an HPC system, the scheduler manages which jobs run where
and when.

The following illustration compares these tasks of a job scheduler to a waiter
in a restaurant. If you can relate to an instance where you had to wait for a
while in a queue to get in to a popular restaurant, then you may now understand
why sometimes your job do not start instantly as in your laptop.

![Compare a job scheduler to a waiter in a restaurant](fig/restaurant_queue_manager.svg)

The scheduler used in this lesson is Slurm. Although
Slurm is not used everywhere, running jobs is quite similar
regardless of what software is being used. The exact syntax might change, but
the concepts remain the same.

## Running a Batch Job

The most basic use of the scheduler is to run a command non-interactively. Any
command (or series of commands) that you want to run on the cluster is called a
_job_, and the process of using a scheduler to run the job is called _batch job
submission_.

In this case, the job we want to run is a shell script - essentially a
text file containing a list of UNIX commands to be executed in a sequential
manner. Our shell script will have three parts:

* On the very first line, add `#!/bin/bash`. The `#!`
  (pronounced "hash-bang" or "shebang") tells the computer what program is
  meant to process the contents of this file. In this case, we are telling it
  that the commands that follow are written for the bash command-line shell (what
  we've been doing everything in so far).
* Anywhere below the first line, we'll add an `echo` command with a friendly
  greeting. When run, the shell script will print whatever comes after `echo`
  in the terminal.
  * `echo -n` will print everything that follows, _without_ ending
    the line by printing the new-line character.
* On the last line, we'll invoke the `hostname` command, which will print the
  name of the machine the script is run on.

```bash
remote$ nano example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/bin/bash

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname
```

::::challenge{id=creating-job title="Creating Our Test Job"}

Run the script. Does it execute on the cluster or just our login node?

:::solution

```bash
remote$ bash example-job.sh
```

```text
This script is running on <<cluster.name>>
```

:::
::::

This script ran on the login node, but we want to take advantage of
the compute nodes: we need the scheduler to queue up `example-job.sh`
to run on a compute node.

To submit this task to the scheduler, we use the
`sbatch` command.
This creates a _job_ which will run the _script_ when _dispatched_ to
a compute node which the queuing system has identified as being
available to perform the work.

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

```text
Submitted batch job 36855
```

And that's all we need to do to submit a job. Our work is done - now the
scheduler takes over and tries to run the job for us. While the job is waiting
to run, it goes into a list of jobs called the _queue_. To check on our job's
status, we check the queue using the command `squeue -u yourUsername`

```bash
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME           ST REASON START_TIME         T...
36856 yourUsername yourAccount example-job.sh R  None   2017-07-01T16:47:02 ...
```

We can see all the details of our job, most importantly that it is in the R or RUNNING
state. Sometimes our jobs might need to wait in a queue (PENDING) or have an error (E).

:::callout

## Where's the Output?

On the login node, this script printed output to the terminal - but
now, when `squeue` shows the job has finished,
nothing was printed to the terminal.

Cluster job output is typically redirected to a file in the directory you
launched it from. Use `ls` to find and `cat` to read the file.
:::

## Customising a Job

The job we just ran used all of the scheduler's default options. In a
real-world scenario, that's probably not what we want. The default options
represent a reasonable minimum. Chances are, we will need more cores, more
memory, more time, among other special considerations. To get access to these
resources we must customize our job script.

Comments in UNIX shell scripts (denoted by `#`) are typically ignored, but
there are exceptions. For instance the special `#!` comment at the beginning of
scripts specifies what program should be used to run it (you'll typically see
`#!/bin/bash`). Schedulers like Slurm also
have a special comment used to denote special scheduler-specific options.
Though these comments differ from scheduler to scheduler,
Slurm's special comment is `#SBATCH`. Anything
following the `#SBATCH` comment is interpreted as an
instruction to the scheduler.

Let's illustrate this by example. By default, a job's name is the name of the
script, but the `-J` option can be used to change the
name of a job. Add an option to the script:

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -J hello-world

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname
```

Submit the job and monitor its status:

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME     ST REASON   START_TIME TIME TIME_LEF...
38191 yourUsername yourAccount hello-wo PD Priority N/A        0:00 1:00:00 ...
```

Fantastic, we've successfully changed the name of our job!

### Resource Requests

What about more important changes, such as the number of cores and memory for
our jobs? One thing that is absolutely critical when working on an HPC system
is specifying the resources required to run a job. This allows the scheduler to
find the right time and place to schedule our job. If you do not specify
requirements (such as the amount of time you need), you will likely be stuck
with your site's default resources, which is probably not what you want.

The following are several key resource requests:

* `--ntasks=<ntasks>` or `-n <ntasks>`: How many CPU cores does your job need, in total?

* `--time <days-hours:minutes:seconds>` or `-t <days-hours:minutes:seconds>`: How much
  real-world time (walltime) will your job take to run? The `<days>` part can be omitted.

* `--mem=<megabytes>`: How much memory on a node does your job need in megabytes? You can
  also specify gigabytes using by adding a little “g” afterwards (example: `--mem=5g`)

* `--nodes=<nnodes>` or `-N <nnodes>`: How many separate machines does your job need to run
  on? Note that if you set ntasks to a number greater than what one machine can offer,
  Slurm will set this value automatically.

Note that just _requesting_ these resources does not make your job run faster,
nor does it necessarily mean that you will consume all of these resources. It
only means that these are made available to you. Your job may end up using less
memory, or less time, or fewer nodes than you have requested, and it will still
run.

It's best if your requests accurately reflect your job's requirements. We'll
talk more about how to make sure that you're using resources effectively in a
later episode of this lesson.

::::challenge{id=submit-request title="Submitting Resource Requests"}

Modify our `hostname` script so that it runs for a minute, then submit a job
for it on the cluster.

:::solution

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -t 00:01 # timeout in HH:MM

echo -n "This script is running on "
sleep 20 # time in seconds
hostname
```

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

Why are the Slurm runtime and `sleep` time not identical?
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=env-var title="Job environment variables"}

When Slurm runs a job, it sets a number of environment variables for the job. One of
these will let us check what directory our job script was submitted from. The
`SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR` variable is set to the directory from which our job was submitted.
Using the `SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR` variable, modify your job so that it prints out the
location from which the job was submitted

:::solution

```bash
remote$ nano example-job.sh
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -t 00:00:30

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname

echo "This job was launched in the following directory:"
echo ${SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR}
```

:::
::::

Resource requests are typically binding. If you exceed them, your job will be
killed. Let's use wall time as an example. We will request 1 minute of
wall time, and attempt to run a job for two minutes.

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -J long_job
#SBATCH -t 00:01 # timeout in HH:MM

echo "This script is running on ... "
sleep 240 # time in seconds
hostname
```

Submit the job and wait for it to finish. Once it is has finished, check the
log file.

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```bash
remote$ cat slurm-38193.out
```

```text
This job is running on:
gra533
slurmstepd: error: *** JOB 38193 ON gra533 CANCELLED AT 2017-07-02T16:35:48
DUE TO TIME LIMIT ***
```

Our job was killed for exceeding the amount of resources it requested. Although
this appears harsh, this is actually a feature. Strict adherence to resource
requests allows the scheduler to find the best possible place for your jobs.
Even more importantly, it ensures that another user cannot use more resources
than they've been given. If another user messes up and accidentally attempts to
use all of the cores or memory on a node, {{ site.sched.name }} will either
restrain their job to the requested resources or kill the job outright. Other
jobs on the node will be unaffected. This means that one user cannot mess up
the experience of others, the only jobs affected by a mistake in scheduling
will be their own.

## Cancelling a Job

Sometimes we'll make a mistake and need to cancel a job. This can be done with
the `scancel` command. Let's submit a job and then cancel it using
its job number (remember to change the walltime so that it runs long enough for
you to cancel it before it is killed!).

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
Submitted batch job 38759

JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME           ST REASON   TIME TIME_LEFT NOD...
38759 yourUsername yourAccount example-job.sh PD Priority 0:00 1:00      1  ...
```

Now cancel the job with its job number (printed in your terminal). A clean
return of your command prompt indicates that the request to cancel the job was
successful.

```bash
remote$ scancel 38759
# It might take a minute for the job to disappear from the queue...
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID  USER  ACCOUNT  NAME  ST  REASON  START_TIME  TIME  TIME_LEFT  NODES CPUS
```

::::challenge{id=cancel-multiple title="Cancelling multiple jobs"}

We can also cancel all of our jobs at once using the -u option. This will delete all
jobs for a specific user (in this case, yourself). Note that you can only delete your
own jobs.

Try submitting multiple jobs and then cancelling them all.

:::solution
First, submit a trio of jobs:

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

Then, cancel them all:

```bash
remote$ scancel -u yourUsername
```

:::
::::

## Other Types of Jobs

Up to this point, we've focused on running jobs in batch mode.
Slurm also provides the ability to start an interactive session.

There are very frequently tasks that need to be done interactively. Creating an
entire job script might be overkill, but the amount of resources required is
too much for a login node to handle. A good example of this might be building a
genome index for alignment with a tool like [HISAT2][hisat]. Fortunately, we
can run these types of tasks as a one-off with `srun`.

`srun` runs a single command on the cluster and then exits. Let’s demonstrate this by
running the hostname command with `srun`. (We can cancel an `srun` job with `Ctrl-c`.)

```bash
remote$ srun hostname
```

```text
gra752
```

`srun` accepts all of the same options as `sbatch`. However, instead of specifying these in
a script, these options are specified on the command-line when starting a job. To submit
a job that uses 2 CPUs for instance, we could use the following command:

```bash
remote$ srun -n 2 echo "This job will use 2 CPUs."
```

```text
This job will use 2 CPUs.
This job will use 2 CPUs.
```

Typically, the resulting shell environment will be the same as that for `sbatch`.

## Interactive jobs

Sometimes, you will need a lot of resource for interactive use. Perhaps it’s our first
time running an analysis or we are attempting to debug something that went wrong with a
previous job. Fortunately, Slurm makes it easy to start an interactive job with `srun`:

```bash
remote$ srun --pty bash
```

You should be presented with a bash prompt. Note that the prompt will likely change to
reflect your new location, in this case the compute node we are logged on. You can also
verify this with hostname.

:::callout

### Creating remote graphics

To see graphical output inside your jobs, you need to use X11 forwarding. To connect
with this feature enabled, use the -Y option when you login with the ssh command, e.g.,
`ssh -Y user@cluster.name`.

To demonstrate what happens when you create a graphics window on the remote node, use
the `xeyes` command. A relatively adorable pair of eyes should pop up (press `Ctrl-C` to
stop). If you are using a Mac, you must have installed XQuartz (and restarted your
computer) for this to work.

If your cluster has the `slurm-spank-x11` plugin installed, you can ensure X11
forwarding within interactive jobs by using the `--x11` option for `srun` with the command
`srun --x11 --pty bash`.
:::

When you are done with the interactive job, type `exit` to quit your session.

## Key Points

* The scheduler handles how compute resources are shared between users.
* A job is just a shell script.
* Request slightly more resources than you will need.

[hisat]: https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml

Commit message:

add learning objectives for HPC Intro

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/04_scheduler.md, after:

---
name: Introduction to Job Scheduling
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.03_cluster
]
tags: [slurm, ARC]
learningOutcomes:
  - Submit a simple script to the cluster.
  - Monitor the execution of jobs using command line tools.
  - Inspect the output and error files of your jobs.
  - Find the right place to put large datasets on the cluster.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Job Scheduler

An HPC system might have thousands of nodes and thousands of users. How do we
decide who gets what and when? How do we ensure that a task is run with the
resources it needs? This job is handled by a special piece of software called
the _scheduler_. On an HPC system, the scheduler manages which jobs run where
and when.

The following illustration compares these tasks of a job scheduler to a waiter
in a restaurant. If you can relate to an instance where you had to wait for a
while in a queue to get in to a popular restaurant, then you may now understand
why sometimes your job do not start instantly as in your laptop.

![Compare a job scheduler to a waiter in a restaurant](fig/restaurant_queue_manager.svg)

The scheduler used in this lesson is Slurm. Although
Slurm is not used everywhere, running jobs is quite similar
regardless of what software is being used. The exact syntax might change, but
the concepts remain the same.

## Running a Batch Job

The most basic use of the scheduler is to run a command non-interactively. Any
command (or series of commands) that you want to run on the cluster is called a
_job_, and the process of using a scheduler to run the job is called _batch job
submission_.

In this case, the job we want to run is a shell script - essentially a
text file containing a list of UNIX commands to be executed in a sequential
manner. Our shell script will have three parts:

* On the very first line, add `#!/bin/bash`. The `#!`
  (pronounced "hash-bang" or "shebang") tells the computer what program is
  meant to process the contents of this file. In this case, we are telling it
  that the commands that follow are written for the bash command-line shell (what
  we've been doing everything in so far).
* Anywhere below the first line, we'll add an `echo` command with a friendly
  greeting. When run, the shell script will print whatever comes after `echo`
  in the terminal.
  * `echo -n` will print everything that follows, _without_ ending
    the line by printing the new-line character.
* On the last line, we'll invoke the `hostname` command, which will print the
  name of the machine the script is run on.

```bash
remote$ nano example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/bin/bash

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname
```

::::challenge{id=creating-job title="Creating Our Test Job"}

Run the script. Does it execute on the cluster or just our login node?

:::solution

```bash
remote$ bash example-job.sh
```

```text
This script is running on <<cluster.name>>
```

:::
::::

This script ran on the login node, but we want to take advantage of
the compute nodes: we need the scheduler to queue up `example-job.sh`
to run on a compute node.

To submit this task to the scheduler, we use the
`sbatch` command.
This creates a _job_ which will run the _script_ when _dispatched_ to
a compute node which the queuing system has identified as being
available to perform the work.

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

```text
Submitted batch job 36855
```

And that's all we need to do to submit a job. Our work is done - now the
scheduler takes over and tries to run the job for us. While the job is waiting
to run, it goes into a list of jobs called the _queue_. To check on our job's
status, we check the queue using the command `squeue -u yourUsername`

```bash
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME           ST REASON START_TIME         T...
36856 yourUsername yourAccount example-job.sh R  None   2017-07-01T16:47:02 ...
```

We can see all the details of our job, most importantly that it is in the R or RUNNING
state. Sometimes our jobs might need to wait in a queue (PENDING) or have an error (E).

:::callout

## Where's the Output?

On the login node, this script printed output to the terminal - but
now, when `squeue` shows the job has finished,
nothing was printed to the terminal.

Cluster job output is typically redirected to a file in the directory you
launched it from. Use `ls` to find and `cat` to read the file.
:::

## Customising a Job

The job we just ran used all of the scheduler's default options. In a
real-world scenario, that's probably not what we want. The default options
represent a reasonable minimum. Chances are, we will need more cores, more
memory, more time, among other special considerations. To get access to these
resources we must customize our job script.

Comments in UNIX shell scripts (denoted by `#`) are typically ignored, but
there are exceptions. For instance the special `#!` comment at the beginning of
scripts specifies what program should be used to run it (you'll typically see
`#!/bin/bash`). Schedulers like Slurm also
have a special comment used to denote special scheduler-specific options.
Though these comments differ from scheduler to scheduler,
Slurm's special comment is `#SBATCH`. Anything
following the `#SBATCH` comment is interpreted as an
instruction to the scheduler.

Let's illustrate this by example. By default, a job's name is the name of the
script, but the `-J` option can be used to change the
name of a job. Add an option to the script:

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -J hello-world

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname
```

Submit the job and monitor its status:

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME     ST REASON   START_TIME TIME TIME_LEF...
38191 yourUsername yourAccount hello-wo PD Priority N/A        0:00 1:00:00 ...
```

Fantastic, we've successfully changed the name of our job!

### Resource Requests

What about more important changes, such as the number of cores and memory for
our jobs? One thing that is absolutely critical when working on an HPC system
is specifying the resources required to run a job. This allows the scheduler to
find the right time and place to schedule our job. If you do not specify
requirements (such as the amount of time you need), you will likely be stuck
with your site's default resources, which is probably not what you want.

The following are several key resource requests:

* `--ntasks=<ntasks>` or `-n <ntasks>`: How many CPU cores does your job need, in total?

* `--time <days-hours:minutes:seconds>` or `-t <days-hours:minutes:seconds>`: How much
  real-world time (walltime) will your job take to run? The `<days>` part can be omitted.

* `--mem=<megabytes>`: How much memory on a node does your job need in megabytes? You can
  also specify gigabytes using by adding a little “g” afterwards (example: `--mem=5g`)

* `--nodes=<nnodes>` or `-N <nnodes>`: How many separate machines does your job need to run
  on? Note that if you set ntasks to a number greater than what one machine can offer,
  Slurm will set this value automatically.

Note that just _requesting_ these resources does not make your job run faster,
nor does it necessarily mean that you will consume all of these resources. It
only means that these are made available to you. Your job may end up using less
memory, or less time, or fewer nodes than you have requested, and it will still
run.

It's best if your requests accurately reflect your job's requirements. We'll
talk more about how to make sure that you're using resources effectively in a
later episode of this lesson.

::::challenge{id=submit-request title="Submitting Resource Requests"}

Modify our `hostname` script so that it runs for a minute, then submit a job
for it on the cluster.

:::solution

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -t 00:01 # timeout in HH:MM

echo -n "This script is running on "
sleep 20 # time in seconds
hostname
```

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

Why are the Slurm runtime and `sleep` time not identical?
:::
::::

::::challenge{id=env-var title="Job environment variables"}

When Slurm runs a job, it sets a number of environment variables for the job. One of
these will let us check what directory our job script was submitted from. The
`SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR` variable is set to the directory from which our job was submitted.
Using the `SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR` variable, modify your job so that it prints out the
location from which the job was submitted

:::solution

```bash
remote$ nano example-job.sh
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -t 00:00:30

echo -n "This script is running on "
hostname

echo "This job was launched in the following directory:"
echo ${SLURM_SUBMIT_DIR}
```

:::
::::

Resource requests are typically binding. If you exceed them, your job will be
killed. Let's use wall time as an example. We will request 1 minute of
wall time, and attempt to run a job for two minutes.

```bash
remote$ cat example-job.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash
#SBATCH -J long_job
#SBATCH -t 00:01 # timeout in HH:MM

echo "This script is running on ... "
sleep 240 # time in seconds
hostname
```

Submit the job and wait for it to finish. Once it is has finished, check the
log file.

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```bash
remote$ cat slurm-38193.out
```

```text
This job is running on:
gra533
slurmstepd: error: *** JOB 38193 ON gra533 CANCELLED AT 2017-07-02T16:35:48
DUE TO TIME LIMIT ***
```

Our job was killed for exceeding the amount of resources it requested. Although
this appears harsh, this is actually a feature. Strict adherence to resource
requests allows the scheduler to find the best possible place for your jobs.
Even more importantly, it ensures that another user cannot use more resources
than they've been given. If another user messes up and accidentally attempts to
use all of the cores or memory on a node, {{ site.sched.name }} will either
restrain their job to the requested resources or kill the job outright. Other
jobs on the node will be unaffected. This means that one user cannot mess up
the experience of others, the only jobs affected by a mistake in scheduling
will be their own.

## Cancelling a Job

Sometimes we'll make a mistake and need to cancel a job. This can be done with
the `scancel` command. Let's submit a job and then cancel it using
its job number (remember to change the walltime so that it runs long enough for
you to cancel it before it is killed!).

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
Submitted batch job 38759

JOBID USER         ACCOUNT     NAME           ST REASON   TIME TIME_LEFT NOD...
38759 yourUsername yourAccount example-job.sh PD Priority 0:00 1:00      1  ...
```

Now cancel the job with its job number (printed in your terminal). A clean
return of your command prompt indicates that the request to cancel the job was
successful.

```bash
remote$ scancel 38759
# It might take a minute for the job to disappear from the queue...
remote$ squeue -u yourUsername
```

```text
JOBID  USER  ACCOUNT  NAME  ST  REASON  START_TIME  TIME  TIME_LEFT  NODES CPUS
```

::::challenge{id=cancel-multiple title="Cancelling multiple jobs"}

We can also cancel all of our jobs at once using the -u option. This will delete all
jobs for a specific user (in this case, yourself). Note that you can only delete your
own jobs.

Try submitting multiple jobs and then cancelling them all.

:::solution
First, submit a trio of jobs:

```bash
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
remote$ sbatch example-job.sh
```

Then, cancel them all:

```bash
remote$ scancel -u yourUsername
```

:::
::::

## Other Types of Jobs

Up to this point, we've focused on running jobs in batch mode.
Slurm also provides the ability to start an interactive session.

There are very frequently tasks that need to be done interactively. Creating an
entire job script might be overkill, but the amount of resources required is
too much for a login node to handle. A good example of this might be building a
genome index for alignment with a tool like [HISAT2][hisat]. Fortunately, we
can run these types of tasks as a one-off with `srun`.

`srun` runs a single command on the cluster and then exits. Let’s demonstrate this by
running the hostname command with `srun`. (We can cancel an `srun` job with `Ctrl-c`.)

```bash
remote$ srun hostname
```

```text
gra752
```

`srun` accepts all of the same options as `sbatch`. However, instead of specifying these in
a script, these options are specified on the command-line when starting a job. To submit
a job that uses 2 CPUs for instance, we could use the following command:

```bash
remote$ srun -n 2 echo "This job will use 2 CPUs."
```

```text
This job will use 2 CPUs.
This job will use 2 CPUs.
```

Typically, the resulting shell environment will be the same as that for `sbatch`.

## Interactive jobs

Sometimes, you will need a lot of resource for interactive use. Perhaps it’s our first
time running an analysis or we are attempting to debug something that went wrong with a
previous job. Fortunately, Slurm makes it easy to start an interactive job with `srun`:

```bash
remote$ srun --pty bash
```

You should be presented with a bash prompt. Note that the prompt will likely change to
reflect your new location, in this case the compute node we are logged on. You can also
verify this with hostname.

:::callout

### Creating remote graphics

To see graphical output inside your jobs, you need to use X11 forwarding. To connect
with this feature enabled, use the -Y option when you login with the ssh command, e.g.,
`ssh -Y user@cluster.name`.

To demonstrate what happens when you create a graphics window on the remote node, use
the `xeyes` command. A relatively adorable pair of eyes should pop up (press `Ctrl-C` to
stop). If you are using a Mac, you must have installed XQuartz (and restarted your
computer) for this to work.

If your cluster has the `slurm-spank-x11` plugin installed, you can ensure X11
forwarding within interactive jobs by using the `--x11` option for `srun` with the command
`srun --x11 --pty bash`.
:::

When you are done with the interactive job, type `exit` to quit your session.

## Key Points

* The scheduler handles how compute resources are shared between users.
* A job is just a shell script.
* Request slightly more resources than you will need.

[hisat]: https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml
