high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/05_modules.md, before:

---
name: Accessing Software via Modules
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.04_scheduler
]
tags: [ARC]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

On a high-performance computing system, it is seldom the case that the software
we want to use is available when we log in. It is installed, but we will need
to "load" it before it can run.

Before we start using individual software packages, however, we should
understand the reasoning behind this approach. The three biggest factors are:

- software incompatibilities
- versioning
- dependencies

Software incompatibility is a major headache for programmers. Sometimes the
presence (or absence) of a software package will break others that depend on
it. Two of the most famous examples are Python 2 and 3 and C compiler versions.
Python 3 famously provides a `python` command that conflicts with that provided
by Python 2. Software compiled against a newer version of the C libraries and
then used when they are not present will result in a nasty `'GLIBCXX_3.4.20'
not found` error, for instance.

Software versioning is another common issue. A team might depend on a certain
package version for their research project - if the software version was to
change (for instance, if a package was updated), it might affect their results.
Having access to multiple software versions allow a set of researchers to
prevent software versioning issues from affecting their results.

Dependencies are where a particular software package (or even a particular
version) depends on having access to another software package (or even a
particular version of another software package). For example, the VASP
materials science software may depend on having a particular version of the
FFTW (Fastest Fourier Transform in the West) software library available for it
to work.

## Environment Modules

Environment modules are the solution to these problems. A _module_ is a
self-contained description of a software package -- it contains the
settings required to run a software package and, usually, encodes required
dependencies on other software packages.

There are a number of different environment module implementations commonly
used on HPC systems: the two most common are _TCL modules_ and _Lmod_. Both of
these use similar syntax and the concepts are the same so learning to use one
will allow you to use whichever is installed on the system you are using. In
both implementations the `module` command is used to interact with environment
modules. An additional subcommand is usually added to the command to specify
what you want to do. For a list of subcommands you can use `module -h` or
`module help`. As for all commands, you can access the full help on the _man_
pages with `man module`.

On login you may start out with a default set of modules loaded or you may
start out with an empty environment; this depends on the setup of the system
you are using.

### Listing Available Modules

To see available software modules, use `module avail`:

```bash
remote$ module avail
```

```text
---------------- MPI-dependent avx2 modules -----------------
 abinit/8.2.2     (chem)           ncl/6.4.0
 abyss/1.9.0      (bio)            ncview/2.1.7        (vis)
 boost-mpi/1.60.0 (t)              plumed/2.3.0        (chem)
 cdo/1.7.2        (geo)            pnetcdf/1.8.1       (io)
 lammps/20170331                   quantumespresso/6.0 (chem)
 mrbayes/3.2.6            (bio)    ray/2.3.1           (bio)


[removed most of the output here for clarity]

   t:        Tools for development / Outils de développement
   vis:      Visualisation software / Logiciels de visualisation
   chem:     Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   geo:      Geography libraries/apps / Logiciels de géographie
   phys:     Physics libraries/apps / Logiciels de physique
   Aliases:  Aliases exist: foo/1.2.3 (1.2) means that
             "module load foo/1.2" will load foo/1.2.3
   D:        Default Module

Use "module spider" to find all possible modules.
Use "module keyword key1 key2 ..." to search for all possible modules matching
any of the "keys".
```

### Listing Currently Loaded Modules

You can use the `module list` command to see which modules you currently have
loaded in your environment. If you have no modules loaded, you will see a
message telling you so

```bash
remote$ module list
```

```text
No Modulefiles Currently Loaded.
```

## Loading and Unloading Software

To load a software module, use `module load`. In this example we will use
Python 3.

Initially, Python 3 is not loaded. We can test this by using the `which`
command. `which` looks for programs the same way that Bash does, so we can use
it to tell us where a particular piece of software is stored.

```bash
remote$ which python3
```

```text
python3 not found
```

We can load the `python3` command with `module load`:

```bash
remote$ module load python
remote$ which python3
```

```text
/path/to/python/python3
```

where `/path/to/python` is a directory that depends on the particular cluster setup.

So, what just happened?

To understand the output, first we need to understand the nature of the `$PATH`
environment variable. `$PATH` is a special environment variable that controls
where a UNIX system looks for software. Specifically `$PATH` is a list of
directories (separated by `:`) that the OS searches through for a command
before giving up and telling us it can't find it. As with all environment
variables we can print it out using `echo`.

```bash
remote$ echo $PATH
```

```text
/path/to/python:/another/path:/some/other/path:/yet/another/path
```

You'll notice a similarity to the output of the `which` command.
In this case, there's only one difference: the different directory at the beginning.
When we ran the `module load` command, it added a directory to the beginning of our `$PATH`.
Let's examine what's there:

```bash
remote$ ls /path/to/python
```

```text
2to3              idle3.5  pydoc3.5          python3.5m         virtualenv
2to3-3.5          pip      python            python3.5m-config  wheel
easy_install      pip3     python3           python3-config
easy_install-3.5  pip3.5   python3.5         pyvenv
idle3             pydoc3   python3.5-config  pyvenv-3.5
```

Taking this to its conclusion, `module load` will add software to your `$PATH`.
It "loads" software.
A special note on this - depending on which version of the `module` program that is installed at your site,
`module load` will also load required software dependencies.

To demonstrate, let’s use `module list`. `module list` shows all loaded software modules.

```bash
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)      5) intel/2016.4  (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)        6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)        7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)        8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:  Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   m:  MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:  Tools for development / Outils de développement
   H:             Hidden Module
```

The list of modules available will vary widely by HPC system.
If your system has the `beast` module available, then loading `beast` module (a bioinformatics software package) will do something like this:

```bash
remote$ module load beast
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)  5) intel/2016.4  (t)   9) java/1.8.0_121   (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)    6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)  10) beagle-lib/2.1.2 (bio)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)    7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)  11) beast/2.4.0      (chem)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)    8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:     Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   bio:   Bioinformatic libraries/apps / Logiciels de bioinformatique
   m:     MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:     Tools for development / Outils de développement
   chem:  Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   H:                Hidden Module
```

So in this case, `beast` also loaded `java/1.8.0_121` and `beagle-lib/2.1.2` as well.
Let’s try unloading the `beast` package.

```bash
remote$ module unload beast
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)      5) intel/2016.4  (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)        6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)        7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)        8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:  Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   m:  MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:  Tools for development / Outils de développement
   H:             Hidden Module
```

So using `module unload` “un-loads” a module along with its dependencies.
If we wanted to unload everything at once, we could run `module purge` (unloads everything).

```bash
remote$ module purge
```

```output
The following modules were not unloaded:
  (Use "module --force purge" to unload all):

  1) StdEnv/2016.4                5) ifort/.2016.4.258
  2) nixpkgs/.16.09               6) intel/2016.4
  3) icc/.2016.4.258              7) imkl/11.3.4.258
  4) gcccore/.5.4.0               8) openmpi/2.1.1
```

Note that `module purge` is informative.
It lets us know that all but a default set of packages have been unloaded (and how to actually unload these if we truly so desired).

Note that this module loading process happens principally through the manipulation of environment variables like $PATH. There is usually little or no data transfer involved.

The module loading process manipulates other special environment variables as well,
including variables that influence where the system looks for software libraries,
and  sometimes variables which tell commercial software packages where to find license servers.

The module command also restores these shell environment variables to their previous state when a module is unloaded.

## Software Versioning

So far, we've learned how to load and unload software packages.
This is very useful.
However, we have not yet addressed the issue of software versioning.
At some point or other, you will run into issues where only one particular version of some software will be suitable.
Perhaps a key bugfix only happened in a certain version, or version X broke compatibility with a file format you use.
In either of these example cases, it helps to be very specific about what software is loaded.

Let's examine the output of `module avail` more closely.

```bash
remote$ module avail
```

```text
---------------- MPI-dependent avx2 modules -----------------
 abinit/8.2.2     (chem)           ncl/6.4.0
 abyss/1.9.0      (bio)            ncview/2.1.7        (vis)
 boost-mpi/1.60.0 (t)              plumed/2.3.0        (chem)
 cdo/1.7.2        (geo)            pnetcdf/1.8.1       (io)
 lammps/20170331                   quantumespresso/6.0 (chem)
 mrbayes/3.2.6            (bio)    ray/2.3.1           (bio)
 gcc/4.8.5                         gcc/5.4.0           (D)

[removed most of the output here for clarity]

   t:        Tools for development / Outils de développement
   vis:      Visualisation software / Logiciels de visualisation
   chem:     Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   geo:      Geography libraries/apps / Logiciels de géographie
   phys:     Physics libraries/apps / Logiciels de physique
   Aliases:  Aliases exist: foo/1.2.3 (1.2) means that
             "module load foo/1.2" will load foo/1.2.3
   D:        Default Module

Use "module spider" to find all possible modules.
Use "module keyword key1 key2 ..." to search for all possible modules matching
any of the "keys".
```

Let’s take a closer look at the gcc module.
GCC is an extremely widely used  C/C++/Fortran compiler.
Tons of software is dependent on the GCC version, and might not compile or run if the wrong version is loaded.
In this case, there are two different versions: `gcc/4.8.5` and `gcc/5.4.0`.
How do we load each copy, and which copy is the default?

In this case, `gcc/5.4.0` has a `(D)` next to it. This indicates that it is the default
— if we type `module load gcc`, this is the copy that will be loaded.

::::callout{variant="tip"}

## Filtering Lists

A lot of HPC systems will have so many modules available that looking through the whole of `module avail` is just not practical.
You can use `module avail gcc` to check out the versions of GCC available on yours.
An example output from a different system might be:

```bash
remote$ module avail gcc
```

```text
------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/apps --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

----------------------------------------------- /local/modules/compilers -----------------------------------------------
   gcc/6.4.0    gcc/10.2.0    gcc/11.1.0    gcc/12.2.0    gcc/13.2.0 (D)
   gcc/8.5.0    gcc/10.3.0    gcc/12.1.0    gcc/13.1.0

------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/libs --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

-------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/mpi --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

  Where:
   D:  Default Module
```

::::

```bash
remote$ module load gcc
remote$ gcc --version
```

```text
Lmod is automatically replacing "intel/2016.4" with "gcc/5.4.0".

Due to MODULEPATH changes, the following have been reloaded:
  1) openmpi/2.1.1

gcc (GCC) 5.4.0
Copyright (C) 2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
```

Note that three things happened: the default copy of GCC was loaded (version 5.4.0), the
Intel compilers (which conflict with GCC) were unloaded, and software that is dependent
on compiler (OpenMPI) was reloaded. The module system turned what might be a
super-complex operation into a single command.

So how do we load the non-default copy of a software package? In this case, the only
change we need to make is be more specific about the module we are loading. There are
two GCC modules: `gcc/5.4.0` and `gcc/4.8.5`. To load a non-default module, the only
change we need to make to our module load command is to leave in the version number
after the `/`.

```bash
remote$ module load gcc/4.8.5
```

```text
Inactive Modules:
  1) openmpi

The following have been reloaded with a version change:
  1) gcc/5.4.0 => gcc/4.8.5

gcc (GCC) 4.8.5
Copyright (C) 2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
```

We now have successfully switched from GCC 5.4.0 to GCC 4.8.5. It is also important to
note that there was no compatible OpenMPI module available for GCC 4.8.5. Because of
this, the module program has “inactivated” the module. All this means for us is that if
we re-load GCC 5.4.0, module will remember OpenMPI used to be loaded and load that
module as well.

```bash
remote$ module load gcc/5.4.0
```

```text
Activating Modules:
  1) openmpi/2.1.1

The following have been reloaded with a version change:
  1) gcc/4.8.5 => gcc/5.4.0
```

::::challenge{id=module-script title="Using Software Modules in Scripts"}

Create a job that is able to run `python3 --version`. Remember, no software
is loaded by default! Running a job is just like logging on to the system
(you should not assume a module loaded on the login node is loaded on a
compute node).

:::solution

```bash
remote$ nano python-module.sh
remote$ cat python-module.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash

module load python3

python3 --version
```

```bash
remote$ sbatch python-module.sh
```

:::
::::

Commit message:

add learning objectives for HPC Intro

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/05_modules.md, after:

---
name: Accessing Software via Modules
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.04_scheduler
]
tags: [ARC]
learningOutcomes:
  - Load and use a software package.
  - Explain how the shell environment changes when the module mechanism loads or unloads packages.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

On a high-performance computing system, it is seldom the case that the software
we want to use is available when we log in. It is installed, but we will need
to "load" it before it can run.

Before we start using individual software packages, however, we should
understand the reasoning behind this approach. The three biggest factors are:

- software incompatibilities
- versioning
- dependencies

Software incompatibility is a major headache for programmers. Sometimes the
presence (or absence) of a software package will break others that depend on
it. Two of the most famous examples are Python 2 and 3 and C compiler versions.
Python 3 famously provides a `python` command that conflicts with that provided
by Python 2. Software compiled against a newer version of the C libraries and
then used when they are not present will result in a nasty `'GLIBCXX_3.4.20'
not found` error, for instance.

Software versioning is another common issue. A team might depend on a certain
package version for their research project - if the software version was to
change (for instance, if a package was updated), it might affect their results.
Having access to multiple software versions allow a set of researchers to
prevent software versioning issues from affecting their results.

Dependencies are where a particular software package (or even a particular
version) depends on having access to another software package (or even a
particular version of another software package). For example, the VASP
materials science software may depend on having a particular version of the
FFTW (Fastest Fourier Transform in the West) software library available for it
to work.

## Environment Modules

Environment modules are the solution to these problems. A _module_ is a
self-contained description of a software package -- it contains the
settings required to run a software package and, usually, encodes required
dependencies on other software packages.

There are a number of different environment module implementations commonly
used on HPC systems: the two most common are _TCL modules_ and _Lmod_. Both of
these use similar syntax and the concepts are the same so learning to use one
will allow you to use whichever is installed on the system you are using. In
both implementations the `module` command is used to interact with environment
modules. An additional subcommand is usually added to the command to specify
what you want to do. For a list of subcommands you can use `module -h` or
`module help`. As for all commands, you can access the full help on the _man_
pages with `man module`.

On login you may start out with a default set of modules loaded or you may
start out with an empty environment; this depends on the setup of the system
you are using.

### Listing Available Modules

To see available software modules, use `module avail`:

```bash
remote$ module avail
```

```text
---------------- MPI-dependent avx2 modules -----------------
 abinit/8.2.2     (chem)           ncl/6.4.0
 abyss/1.9.0      (bio)            ncview/2.1.7        (vis)
 boost-mpi/1.60.0 (t)              plumed/2.3.0        (chem)
 cdo/1.7.2        (geo)            pnetcdf/1.8.1       (io)
 lammps/20170331                   quantumespresso/6.0 (chem)
 mrbayes/3.2.6            (bio)    ray/2.3.1           (bio)


[removed most of the output here for clarity]

   t:        Tools for development / Outils de développement
   vis:      Visualisation software / Logiciels de visualisation
   chem:     Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   geo:      Geography libraries/apps / Logiciels de géographie
   phys:     Physics libraries/apps / Logiciels de physique
   Aliases:  Aliases exist: foo/1.2.3 (1.2) means that
             "module load foo/1.2" will load foo/1.2.3
   D:        Default Module

Use "module spider" to find all possible modules.
Use "module keyword key1 key2 ..." to search for all possible modules matching
any of the "keys".
```

### Listing Currently Loaded Modules

You can use the `module list` command to see which modules you currently have
loaded in your environment. If you have no modules loaded, you will see a
message telling you so

```bash
remote$ module list
```

```text
No Modulefiles Currently Loaded.
```

## Loading and Unloading Software

To load a software module, use `module load`. In this example we will use
Python 3.

Initially, Python 3 is not loaded. We can test this by using the `which`
command. `which` looks for programs the same way that Bash does, so we can use
it to tell us where a particular piece of software is stored.

```bash
remote$ which python3
```

```text
python3 not found
```

We can load the `python3` command with `module load`:

```bash
remote$ module load python
remote$ which python3
```

```text
/path/to/python/python3
```

where `/path/to/python` is a directory that depends on the particular cluster setup.

So, what just happened?

To understand the output, first we need to understand the nature of the `$PATH`
environment variable. `$PATH` is a special environment variable that controls
where a UNIX system looks for software. Specifically `$PATH` is a list of
directories (separated by `:`) that the OS searches through for a command
before giving up and telling us it can't find it. As with all environment
variables we can print it out using `echo`.

```bash
remote$ echo $PATH
```

```text
/path/to/python:/another/path:/some/other/path:/yet/another/path
```

You'll notice a similarity to the output of the `which` command.
In this case, there's only one difference: the different directory at the beginning.
When we ran the `module load` command, it added a directory to the beginning of our `$PATH`.
Let's examine what's there:

```bash
remote$ ls /path/to/python
```

```text
2to3              idle3.5  pydoc3.5          python3.5m         virtualenv
2to3-3.5          pip      python            python3.5m-config  wheel
easy_install      pip3     python3           python3-config
easy_install-3.5  pip3.5   python3.5         pyvenv
idle3             pydoc3   python3.5-config  pyvenv-3.5
```

Taking this to its conclusion, `module load` will add software to your `$PATH`.
It "loads" software.
A special note on this - depending on which version of the `module` program that is installed at your site,
`module load` will also load required software dependencies.

To demonstrate, let’s use `module list`. `module list` shows all loaded software modules.

```bash
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)      5) intel/2016.4  (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)        6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)        7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)        8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:  Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   m:  MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:  Tools for development / Outils de développement
   H:             Hidden Module
```

The list of modules available will vary widely by HPC system.
If your system has the `beast` module available, then loading `beast` module (a bioinformatics software package) will do something like this:

```bash
remote$ module load beast
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)  5) intel/2016.4  (t)   9) java/1.8.0_121   (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)    6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)  10) beagle-lib/2.1.2 (bio)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)    7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)  11) beast/2.4.0      (chem)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)    8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:     Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   bio:   Bioinformatic libraries/apps / Logiciels de bioinformatique
   m:     MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:     Tools for development / Outils de développement
   chem:  Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   H:                Hidden Module
```

So in this case, `beast` also loaded `java/1.8.0_121` and `beagle-lib/2.1.2` as well.
Let’s try unloading the `beast` package.

```bash
remote$ module unload beast
remote$ module list
```

```text
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) nixpkgs/.16.09    (H,S)      5) intel/2016.4  (t)
  2) icc/.2016.4.258   (H)        6) openmpi/2.1.1 (m)
  3) gcccore/.5.4.0    (H)        7) StdEnv/2016.4 (S)
  4) ifort/.2016.4.258 (H)        8) python/3.5.2  (t)

  Where:
   S:  Module is Sticky, requires --force to unload or purge
   m:  MPI implementations / Implémentations MPI
   t:  Tools for development / Outils de développement
   H:             Hidden Module
```

So using `module unload` “un-loads” a module along with its dependencies.
If we wanted to unload everything at once, we could run `module purge` (unloads everything).

```bash
remote$ module purge
```

```output
The following modules were not unloaded:
  (Use "module --force purge" to unload all):

  1) StdEnv/2016.4                5) ifort/.2016.4.258
  2) nixpkgs/.16.09               6) intel/2016.4
  3) icc/.2016.4.258              7) imkl/11.3.4.258
  4) gcccore/.5.4.0               8) openmpi/2.1.1
```

Note that `module purge` is informative.
It lets us know that all but a default set of packages have been unloaded (and how to actually unload these if we truly so desired).

Note that this module loading process happens principally through the manipulation of environment variables like $PATH. There is usually little or no data transfer involved.

The module loading process manipulates other special environment variables as well,
including variables that influence where the system looks for software libraries,
and  sometimes variables which tell commercial software packages where to find license servers.

The module command also restores these shell environment variables to their previous state when a module is unloaded.

## Software Versioning

So far, we've learned how to load and unload software packages.
This is very useful.
However, we have not yet addressed the issue of software versioning.
At some point or other, you will run into issues where only one particular version of some software will be suitable.
Perhaps a key bugfix only happened in a certain version, or version X broke compatibility with a file format you use.
In either of these example cases, it helps to be very specific about what software is loaded.

Let's examine the output of `module avail` more closely.

```bash
remote$ module avail
```

```text
---------------- MPI-dependent avx2 modules -----------------
 abinit/8.2.2     (chem)           ncl/6.4.0
 abyss/1.9.0      (bio)            ncview/2.1.7        (vis)
 boost-mpi/1.60.0 (t)              plumed/2.3.0        (chem)
 cdo/1.7.2        (geo)            pnetcdf/1.8.1       (io)
 lammps/20170331                   quantumespresso/6.0 (chem)
 mrbayes/3.2.6            (bio)    ray/2.3.1           (bio)
 gcc/4.8.5                         gcc/5.4.0           (D)

[removed most of the output here for clarity]

   t:        Tools for development / Outils de développement
   vis:      Visualisation software / Logiciels de visualisation
   chem:     Chemistry libraries/apps / Logiciels de chimie
   geo:      Geography libraries/apps / Logiciels de géographie
   phys:     Physics libraries/apps / Logiciels de physique
   Aliases:  Aliases exist: foo/1.2.3 (1.2) means that
             "module load foo/1.2" will load foo/1.2.3
   D:        Default Module

Use "module spider" to find all possible modules.
Use "module keyword key1 key2 ..." to search for all possible modules matching
any of the "keys".
```

Let’s take a closer look at the gcc module.
GCC is an extremely widely used  C/C++/Fortran compiler.
Tons of software is dependent on the GCC version, and might not compile or run if the wrong version is loaded.
In this case, there are two different versions: `gcc/4.8.5` and `gcc/5.4.0`.
How do we load each copy, and which copy is the default?

In this case, `gcc/5.4.0` has a `(D)` next to it. This indicates that it is the default
— if we type `module load gcc`, this is the copy that will be loaded.

::::callout{variant="tip"}

## Filtering Lists

A lot of HPC systems will have so many modules available that looking through the whole of `module avail` is just not practical.
You can use `module avail gcc` to check out the versions of GCC available on yours.
An example output from a different system might be:

```bash
remote$ module avail gcc
```

```text
------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/apps --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

----------------------------------------------- /local/modules/compilers -----------------------------------------------
   gcc/6.4.0    gcc/10.2.0    gcc/11.1.0    gcc/12.2.0    gcc/13.2.0 (D)
   gcc/8.5.0    gcc/10.3.0    gcc/12.1.0    gcc/13.1.0

------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/libs --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

-------------------------------------------------- /local/modules/mpi --------------------------------------------------
[removed for clarity]

  Where:
   D:  Default Module
```

::::

```bash
remote$ module load gcc
remote$ gcc --version
```

```text
Lmod is automatically replacing "intel/2016.4" with "gcc/5.4.0".

Due to MODULEPATH changes, the following have been reloaded:
  1) openmpi/2.1.1

gcc (GCC) 5.4.0
Copyright (C) 2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
```

Note that three things happened: the default copy of GCC was loaded (version 5.4.0), the
Intel compilers (which conflict with GCC) were unloaded, and software that is dependent
on compiler (OpenMPI) was reloaded. The module system turned what might be a
super-complex operation into a single command.

So how do we load the non-default copy of a software package? In this case, the only
change we need to make is be more specific about the module we are loading. There are
two GCC modules: `gcc/5.4.0` and `gcc/4.8.5`. To load a non-default module, the only
change we need to make to our module load command is to leave in the version number
after the `/`.

```bash
remote$ module load gcc/4.8.5
```

```text
Inactive Modules:
  1) openmpi

The following have been reloaded with a version change:
  1) gcc/5.4.0 => gcc/4.8.5

gcc (GCC) 4.8.5
Copyright (C) 2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
```

We now have successfully switched from GCC 5.4.0 to GCC 4.8.5. It is also important to
note that there was no compatible OpenMPI module available for GCC 4.8.5. Because of
this, the module program has “inactivated” the module. All this means for us is that if
we re-load GCC 5.4.0, module will remember OpenMPI used to be loaded and load that
module as well.

```bash
remote$ module load gcc/5.4.0
```

```text
Activating Modules:
  1) openmpi/2.1.1

The following have been reloaded with a version change:
  1) gcc/4.8.5 => gcc/5.4.0
```

::::challenge{id=module-script title="Using Software Modules in Scripts"}

Create a job that is able to run `python3 --version`. Remember, no software
is loaded by default! Running a job is just like logging on to the system
(you should not assume a module loaded on the login node is loaded on a
compute node).

:::solution

```bash
remote$ nano python-module.sh
remote$ cat python-module.sh
```

```text
#!/usr/bin/env bash

module load python3

python3 --version
```

```bash
remote$ sbatch python-module.sh
```

:::
::::
