high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/09_responsibility.md, before:

---
name: Using Shared Resources Responsibly
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.08_resources
]
tags: [slurm]
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

One of the major differences between using remote HPC resources and your own
system (e.g. your laptop) is that remote resources are shared. How many users
the resource is shared between at any one time varies from system to system, but
it is unlikely you will ever be the only user logged into or using such a
system.

The widespread usage of scheduling systems where users submit jobs on HPC
resources is a natural outcome of the shared nature of these resources. There
are other things you, as an upstanding member of the community, need to
consider.

## Be Kind to the Login Nodes

The login node is often busy managing all of the logged in users, creating and
editing files and compiling software. If the machine runs out of memory or
processing capacity, it will become very slow and unusable for everyone. While
the machine is meant to be used, be sure to do so responsibly - in ways
that will not adversely impact other users' experience.

Login nodes are always the right place to launch jobs. Cluster policies vary,
but they may also be used for proving out workflows, and in some cases, may
host advanced cluster-specific debugging or development tools. The cluster may
have modules that need to be loaded, possibly in a certain order, and paths or
library versions that differ from your laptop, and doing an interactive test
run on the head node is a quick and reliable way to discover and fix these
issues.

::::callout

## Login Nodes Are a Shared Resource

Remember, the login node is shared with all other users and your actions
could cause issues for other people. Think carefully about the potential
implications of issuing commands that may use large amounts of resource.
>
Unsure? Ask your friendly systems administrator ("sysadmin") if the thing
you're contemplating is suitable for the login node, or if there's another
mechanism to get it done safely.
::::

You can always use the commands `top` and `ps ux` to list the processes that
are running on the login node along with the amount of CPU and memory they are
using. If this check reveals that the login node is somewhat idle, you can
safely use it for your non-routine processing task. If something goes wrong

- the process takes too long, or doesn't respond - you can use the
`kill` command along with the _PID_ to terminate the process.

:::::challenge{id=login-node-ettiquette, title="Login Node Etiquette"}

Which of these commands would be a routine task to run on the login node?

1. `python physics_sim.py`
2. `make`
3. `create_directories.sh`
4. `molecular_dynamics_2`
5. `tar -xzf R-3.3.0.tar.gz`

::::solution
Building software, creating directories, and unpacking software are common
and acceptable > tasks for the login node: options #2 (`make`), #3
(`mkdir`), and #5 (`tar`) are probably OK. Note that script names do not
always reflect their contents: before launching #3, please
`less create_directories.sh` and make sure it's not a Trojan horse.

Running resource-intensive applications is frowned upon. Unless you are
sure it will not affect other users, do not run jobs like #1 (`python`)
or #4 (custom MD code). If you're unsure, ask your friendly sysadmin for
advice.
::::
:::::

If you experience performance issues with a login node you should report it to
the system staff (usually via the helpdesk) for them to investigate.

## Test Before Scaling

Remember that you are generally charged for usage on shared systems. A simple
mistake in a job script can end up costing a large amount of resource budget.
Imagine a job script with a mistake that makes it sit doing nothing for 24
hours on 1000 cores or one where you have requested 2000 cores by mistake and
only use 100 of them! This problem can be compounded when people write scripts
that automate job submission (for example, when running the same calculation or
analysis over lots of different parameters or files). When this happens it
hurts both you (as you waste lots of charged resource) and other users (who are
blocked from accessing the idle compute nodes). On very busy resources you may
wait many days in a queue for your job to fail within 10 seconds of starting due
to a trivial typo in the job script. This is extremely frustrating!

Most systems provide dedicated resources for testing that have short wait times
to help you avoid this issue.

::::callout

## Test Job Submission Scripts That Use Large Amounts of Resources

Before submitting a large run of jobs, submit one as a test first to make
sure everything works as expected.

Before submitting a very large or very long job submit a short truncated test
to ensure that the job starts as expected.
::::

## Have a Backup Plan

Although many HPC systems keep backups, it does not always cover all the file
systems available and may only be for disaster recovery purposes (i.e. for
restoring the whole file system if lost rather than an individual file or
directory you have deleted by mistake). Protecting critical data from
corruption or deletion is primarily your responsibility: keep your own backup
copies.

Version control systems (such as Git) often have free, cloud-based offerings
(e.g., GitHub and GitLab) that are generally used for storing source code. Even
if you are not writing your own programs, these can be very useful for storing
job scripts, analysis scripts and small input files.

If you are building software, you may have a large amount of source code
that you compile to build your executable. Since this data can generally
be recovered by re-downloading the code, or re-running the checkout
operation from the source code repository, this data is also less
critical to protect.

For larger amounts of data, especially important results from your runs,
which may be irreplaceable, you should make sure you have a robust system in
place for taking copies of data off the HPC system wherever possible
to backed-up storage. Tools such as `rsync` can be very useful for this.

Your access to the shared HPC system will generally be time-limited so you
should ensure you have a plan for transferring your data off the system before
your access finishes. The time required to transfer large amounts of data
should not be underestimated and you should ensure you have planned for this
early enough (ideally, before you even start using the system for your
research).

In all these cases, the helpdesk of the system you are using should be able to
provide useful guidance on your options for data transfer for the volumes of
data you will be using.

::::callout

## Your Data Is Your Responsibility

Make sure you understand what the backup policy is on the file systems on the
system you are using and what implications this has for your work if you lose
your data on the system. Plan your backups of critical data and how you will
transfer data off the system throughout the project.
::::

## Transferring Data

As mentioned above, many users run into the challenge of transferring large
amounts of data off HPC systems at some point (this is more often in
transferring data off than onto systems but the advice below applies in either
case). Data transfer speed may be limited by many different factors so the best
data transfer mechanism to use depends on the type of data being transferred
and where the data is going.

The components between your data's source and destination have
varying levels of performance, and in particular, may have
different capabilities with respect to __bandwidth__ and __latency__.

__Bandwidth__ is generally the raw amount of data per unit time a
device is capable of transmitting or receiving. It's a common
and generally well-understood metric.

__Latency__ is a bit more subtle. For data transfers, it may be thought
of as the amount of time it takes to get data out of storage and into
a transmittable form. Latency issues are the reason it's advisable
to execute data transfers by moving a small number of large
files, rather than the converse.

Some of the key components and their associated issues are:

- __Disk speed__: File systems on HPC systems are often highly parallel,
  consisting of a very large number of high performance disk drives. This
  allows them to support a very high data bandwidth. Unless the remote system
  has a similar parallel file system you may find your transfer speed limited
  by disk performance at that end.
- __Meta-data performance__: _Meta-data operations_ such as opening and closing
  files or listing the owner or size of a file are much less parallel than
  read/write operations. If your data consists of a very large number of small
  files you may find your transfer speed is limited by meta-data operations.
  Meta-data operations performed by other users of the system can also interact
  strongly with those you perform so reducing the number of such operations you
  use (by combining multiple files into a single file) may reduce variability
  in your transfer rates and increase transfer speeds.
- __Network speed__: Data transfer performance can be limited by network speed.
  More importantly it is limited by the slowest section of the network between
  source and destination. If you are transferring to your laptop/workstation,
  this is likely to be its connection (either via LAN or WiFi).
- __Firewall speed__: Most modern networks are protected by some form of
  firewall that filters out malicious traffic. This filtering has some overhead
  and can result in a reduction in data transfer performance. The needs of a
  general purpose network that hosts email/web-servers and desktop machines are
  quite different from a research network that needs to support high volume
  data transfers. If you are trying to transfer data to or from a host on a
  general purpose network you may find the firewall for that network will limit
  the transfer rate you can achieve.

As mentioned above, if you have related data that consists of a large number of
small files it is strongly recommended to pack the files into a larger
_archive_ file for long term storage and transfer. A single large file makes
more efficient use of the file system and is easier to move, copy and transfer
because significantly fewer metadata operations are required. Archive files can
be created using tools like `tar` and `zip`. We have already met `tar` when we
talked about data transfer earlier.

![Schematic of network bandwidth](fig/responsibility-bandwidth.svg)
_Schematic diagram of bandwidth and latency for disk and network
I/O. Each of the components on the figure is connected by a blue line of
width proportional to the interface bandwidth. The small mazes at the
link points illustrate the latency of the link, with more tortuous
mazes indicating higher latency._

:::::challenge{id=transfer-method, title="Consider the Best Way to Transfer Data"}

If you are transferring large amounts of data you will need to think about
what may affect your transfer performance. It is always useful to run some
tests that you can use to extrapolate how long it will take to transfer your
data.

Say you have a "data" folder containing 10,000 or so files, a healthy mix of
small and large ASCII and binary data. Which of the following would be the
best way to transfer them to `cluster.name`?

1. ```bash
   local$ scp -r data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

2. ```bash
   local$ rsync -ra data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

3. ```bash
   local$ rsync -raz data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

4. ```bash
   local$ tar -cvf data.tar data
   local$ rsync -raz data.tar user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

5. ```bash
   local$ tar -cvzf data.tar.gz data
   local$ rsync -ra data.tar.gz user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

::::solution

1. `scp` will recursively copy the directory. This works, but without
   compression.
2. `rsync -ra` works like `scp -r`, but preserves file information like
   creation times. This is marginally better.
3. `rsync -raz` adds compression, which will save some bandwidth. If you
   have a strong CPU at both ends of the line, and you're on a slow
   network, this is a good choice.
4. This command first uses `tar` to merge everything into a single file,
   then `rsync -z` to transfer it with compression. With this large
   _number_ of files, metadata overhead can hamper your transfer, so this
   is a good idea.
5. This command uses `tar -z` to compress the archive, then `rsync` to
   transfer it. This may perform similarly to #4, but in most cases (for
   large datasets), it's the best combination of high throughput and low
   latency (making the most of your time and network connection).

::::
:::::

Commit message:

Display learning objectives in the lessons (#127)
* add learning objectives for Continuous Integration lesson

* add learning objectives for collaboration lesson

* add learning objectives for Testing lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Scalability Profiling lesson

* add learning objectives for HPC Intro

* fix typo

* add leraning objectives for object-oriented python

* add learning objectives for intro to bash

* add learning objectives for version control lesson

high_performance_computing/hpc_intro/09_responsibility.md, after:

---
name: Using Shared Resources Responsibly
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_intro.08_resources
]
tags: [slurm]
learningOutcomes:
  - Describe how the actions of a single user can affect the experience of others on a shared system.
  - Discuss the behaviour of a considerate shared system citizen.
  - Explain the importance of backing up critical data.
  - Describe the challenges with transferring large amounts of data off HPC systems.
  - Convert many files to a single archive file using tar.
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to High-Performance Computing" course by the HPC-carpentries
      url: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/
      image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/hpc-intro/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

One of the major differences between using remote HPC resources and your own
system (e.g. your laptop) is that remote resources are shared. How many users
the resource is shared between at any one time varies from system to system, but
it is unlikely you will ever be the only user logged into or using such a
system.

The widespread usage of scheduling systems where users submit jobs on HPC
resources is a natural outcome of the shared nature of these resources. There
are other things you, as an upstanding member of the community, need to
consider.

## Be Kind to the Login Nodes

The login node is often busy managing all of the logged in users, creating and
editing files and compiling software. If the machine runs out of memory or
processing capacity, it will become very slow and unusable for everyone. While
the machine is meant to be used, be sure to do so responsibly - in ways
that will not adversely impact other users' experience.

Login nodes are always the right place to launch jobs. Cluster policies vary,
but they may also be used for proving out workflows, and in some cases, may
host advanced cluster-specific debugging or development tools. The cluster may
have modules that need to be loaded, possibly in a certain order, and paths or
library versions that differ from your laptop, and doing an interactive test
run on the head node is a quick and reliable way to discover and fix these
issues.

::::callout

## Login Nodes Are a Shared Resource

Remember, the login node is shared with all other users and your actions
could cause issues for other people. Think carefully about the potential
implications of issuing commands that may use large amounts of resource.
>
Unsure? Ask your friendly systems administrator ("sysadmin") if the thing
you're contemplating is suitable for the login node, or if there's another
mechanism to get it done safely.
::::

You can always use the commands `top` and `ps ux` to list the processes that
are running on the login node along with the amount of CPU and memory they are
using. If this check reveals that the login node is somewhat idle, you can
safely use it for your non-routine processing task. If something goes wrong

- the process takes too long, or doesn't respond - you can use the
`kill` command along with the _PID_ to terminate the process.

:::::challenge{id=login-node-ettiquette, title="Login Node Etiquette"}

Which of these commands would be a routine task to run on the login node?

1. `python physics_sim.py`
2. `make`
3. `create_directories.sh`
4. `molecular_dynamics_2`
5. `tar -xzf R-3.3.0.tar.gz`

::::solution
Building software, creating directories, and unpacking software are common
and acceptable > tasks for the login node: options #2 (`make`), #3
(`mkdir`), and #5 (`tar`) are probably OK. Note that script names do not
always reflect their contents: before launching #3, please
`less create_directories.sh` and make sure it's not a Trojan horse.

Running resource-intensive applications is frowned upon. Unless you are
sure it will not affect other users, do not run jobs like #1 (`python`)
or #4 (custom MD code). If you're unsure, ask your friendly sysadmin for
advice.
::::
:::::

If you experience performance issues with a login node you should report it to
the system staff (usually via the helpdesk) for them to investigate.

## Test Before Scaling

Remember that you are generally charged for usage on shared systems. A simple
mistake in a job script can end up costing a large amount of resource budget.
Imagine a job script with a mistake that makes it sit doing nothing for 24
hours on 1000 cores or one where you have requested 2000 cores by mistake and
only use 100 of them! This problem can be compounded when people write scripts
that automate job submission (for example, when running the same calculation or
analysis over lots of different parameters or files). When this happens it
hurts both you (as you waste lots of charged resource) and other users (who are
blocked from accessing the idle compute nodes). On very busy resources you may
wait many days in a queue for your job to fail within 10 seconds of starting due
to a trivial typo in the job script. This is extremely frustrating!

Most systems provide dedicated resources for testing that have short wait times
to help you avoid this issue.

::::callout

## Test Job Submission Scripts That Use Large Amounts of Resources

Before submitting a large run of jobs, submit one as a test first to make
sure everything works as expected.

Before submitting a very large or very long job submit a short truncated test
to ensure that the job starts as expected.
::::

## Have a Backup Plan

Although many HPC systems keep backups, it does not always cover all the file
systems available and may only be for disaster recovery purposes (i.e. for
restoring the whole file system if lost rather than an individual file or
directory you have deleted by mistake). Protecting critical data from
corruption or deletion is primarily your responsibility: keep your own backup
copies.

Version control systems (such as Git) often have free, cloud-based offerings
(e.g., GitHub and GitLab) that are generally used for storing source code. Even
if you are not writing your own programs, these can be very useful for storing
job scripts, analysis scripts and small input files.

If you are building software, you may have a large amount of source code
that you compile to build your executable. Since this data can generally
be recovered by re-downloading the code, or re-running the checkout
operation from the source code repository, this data is also less
critical to protect.

For larger amounts of data, especially important results from your runs,
which may be irreplaceable, you should make sure you have a robust system in
place for taking copies of data off the HPC system wherever possible
to backed-up storage. Tools such as `rsync` can be very useful for this.

Your access to the shared HPC system will generally be time-limited so you
should ensure you have a plan for transferring your data off the system before
your access finishes. The time required to transfer large amounts of data
should not be underestimated and you should ensure you have planned for this
early enough (ideally, before you even start using the system for your
research).

In all these cases, the helpdesk of the system you are using should be able to
provide useful guidance on your options for data transfer for the volumes of
data you will be using.

::::callout

## Your Data Is Your Responsibility

Make sure you understand what the backup policy is on the file systems on the
system you are using and what implications this has for your work if you lose
your data on the system. Plan your backups of critical data and how you will
transfer data off the system throughout the project.
::::

## Transferring Data

As mentioned above, many users run into the challenge of transferring large
amounts of data off HPC systems at some point (this is more often in
transferring data off than onto systems but the advice below applies in either
case). Data transfer speed may be limited by many different factors so the best
data transfer mechanism to use depends on the type of data being transferred
and where the data is going.

The components between your data's source and destination have
varying levels of performance, and in particular, may have
different capabilities with respect to __bandwidth__ and __latency__.

__Bandwidth__ is generally the raw amount of data per unit time a
device is capable of transmitting or receiving. It's a common
and generally well-understood metric.

__Latency__ is a bit more subtle. For data transfers, it may be thought
of as the amount of time it takes to get data out of storage and into
a transmittable form. Latency issues are the reason it's advisable
to execute data transfers by moving a small number of large
files, rather than the converse.

Some of the key components and their associated issues are:

- __Disk speed__: File systems on HPC systems are often highly parallel,
  consisting of a very large number of high performance disk drives. This
  allows them to support a very high data bandwidth. Unless the remote system
  has a similar parallel file system you may find your transfer speed limited
  by disk performance at that end.
- __Meta-data performance__: _Meta-data operations_ such as opening and closing
  files or listing the owner or size of a file are much less parallel than
  read/write operations. If your data consists of a very large number of small
  files you may find your transfer speed is limited by meta-data operations.
  Meta-data operations performed by other users of the system can also interact
  strongly with those you perform so reducing the number of such operations you
  use (by combining multiple files into a single file) may reduce variability
  in your transfer rates and increase transfer speeds.
- __Network speed__: Data transfer performance can be limited by network speed.
  More importantly it is limited by the slowest section of the network between
  source and destination. If you are transferring to your laptop/workstation,
  this is likely to be its connection (either via LAN or WiFi).
- __Firewall speed__: Most modern networks are protected by some form of
  firewall that filters out malicious traffic. This filtering has some overhead
  and can result in a reduction in data transfer performance. The needs of a
  general purpose network that hosts email/web-servers and desktop machines are
  quite different from a research network that needs to support high volume
  data transfers. If you are trying to transfer data to or from a host on a
  general purpose network you may find the firewall for that network will limit
  the transfer rate you can achieve.

As mentioned above, if you have related data that consists of a large number of
small files it is strongly recommended to pack the files into a larger
_archive_ file for long term storage and transfer. A single large file makes
more efficient use of the file system and is easier to move, copy and transfer
because significantly fewer metadata operations are required. Archive files can
be created using tools like `tar` and `zip`. We have already met `tar` when we
talked about data transfer earlier.

![Schematic of network bandwidth](fig/responsibility-bandwidth.svg)
_Schematic diagram of bandwidth and latency for disk and network
I/O. Each of the components on the figure is connected by a blue line of
width proportional to the interface bandwidth. The small mazes at the
link points illustrate the latency of the link, with more tortuous
mazes indicating higher latency._

:::::challenge{id=transfer-method, title="Consider the Best Way to Transfer Data"}

If you are transferring large amounts of data you will need to think about
what may affect your transfer performance. It is always useful to run some
tests that you can use to extrapolate how long it will take to transfer your
data.

Say you have a "data" folder containing 10,000 or so files, a healthy mix of
small and large ASCII and binary data. Which of the following would be the
best way to transfer them to `cluster.name`?

1. ```bash
   local$ scp -r data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

2. ```bash
   local$ rsync -ra data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

3. ```bash
   local$ rsync -raz data user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

4. ```bash
   local$ tar -cvf data.tar data
   local$ rsync -raz data.tar user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

5. ```bash
   local$ tar -cvzf data.tar.gz data
   local$ rsync -ra data.tar.gz user@cluster.name:~/
   ```

::::solution

1. `scp` will recursively copy the directory. This works, but without
   compression.
2. `rsync -ra` works like `scp -r`, but preserves file information like
   creation times. This is marginally better.
3. `rsync -raz` adds compression, which will save some bandwidth. If you
   have a strong CPU at both ends of the line, and you're on a slow
   network, this is a good choice.
4. This command first uses `tar` to merge everything into a single file,
   then `rsync -z` to transfer it with compression. With this large
   _number_ of files, metadata overhead can hamper your transfer, so this
   is a good idea.
5. This command uses `tar -z` to compress the archive, then `rsync` to
   transfer it. This may perform similarly to #4, but in most cases (for
   large datasets), it's the best combination of high throughput and low
   latency (making the most of your time and network connection).

::::
:::::
