scientific_computing/linear_algebra/06-Cholesky-decomposition.md, before:

---
name: Cholesky decomposition
dependsOn: ["scientific_computing.linear_algebra.04-LU-decomposition"]
tags: []
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from material by Martin Robinson from the "Scientific Computing" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Cholesky decomposition

_Symmetric positive definite_ matrices are a very special type of matrix that often
arise in practice. From a computational point of view, this class of matrix is very
attractive because it is possible to decompose a symmetic positive definite matrix $A$
very efficiently into a single lower triangular matrix $G$ so that $A = GG^T$.

A matrix $A$ is positive definite if $x^T A x > 0$ for any nonzero $x \in \mathbb{R}$.
This statement by itself is not terribly intuitive, so lets look at also look at an
example of a $2 \times 2$ matrix

$$
A = \left(\begin{matrix}
a_{11} & a_{12} \\
a_{21} & a_{22}
\end{matrix}\right)
$$

If $A$ is symmetic positive definite (SPD) then

$$
\begin{aligned}
x &= (1, 0)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} > 0 \\
x &= (0, 1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{22} > 0 \\
x &= (1, 1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} + 2a_{12} + a_{22} > 0 \\
x &= (1,-1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} - 2a_{12} + a_{22} > 0 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

The first two equations show that the diagonal entries of $A$ must be positive, and
combining the last two equations imply $|a_{12}| \le (a_{11} + a_{22}) / 2$, that is
that the matrix has much of its "mass" on the diagonal (note: this is _not_ the same as
the matrix being diagonally dominant, where $|a_{ii}| > \sum_{i=1...n,j \ne i}
|a_{ij}|$). These two observations for our $2 \times 2$ matrix also apply for a general
$n \times n$ SPD matrix. One of the very nice consequences of this "weighty" diagonal
for SPD matrices is that it precludes the need for pivoting.

It can be shown that if $A$ is a SPD matrix, then the $LDL^T$ decomposition exists and
that $D = \text{diag}(d_1, ..., d_n)$ has positive diagonal entries. Therefore, it is
straightforward to see that $LDL^T$ = $GG^T$, where $G = L \text{diag}(\sqrt{d_1}, ...,
\sqrt{d_n})$. The decomposition $A = GG^T$ is known as the cholesky decomposition and
can be efficiently constructed in $n^3 / 3$ flops. There are a number of algorithms to
construct this decomposition, and both the [wikipedia
entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition) and Chapter 4.2 of the
Matrix Computations textbook by Golub and Van Loan gives a number of different varients.

Note that a $LDL$ decomposition can also be used to calculate a cholesky decomposition,
and this could be more efficient approach since (a) the SPD structure means that we can
neglect pivoting in the $LDL$ decomposition, and (b) the $LDL$ decomposition does not
requiring taking the square root of the diagonal elements.

### Other Reading

- Golub, G. H. & Van Loan, C. F. Matrix Computations, 3rd Ed. (Johns Hopkins University
  Press, 1996). Chapter 4.2
- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition>

### Software

[`scipy.linalg.cholesky`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cholesky.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_factor`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_factor.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_solve`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_solve.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cholesky_banded`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cholesky_banded.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_solve_banded`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_solve_banded.html)

## Problems

::::challenge{id=sampling-random-fields title="Sampling random fields"}

Imagine that we wanted to sample an array of values $x_i$, for $i = 1...n$, where each
value is sampled from an independent normal distribution with standard deviation
$\sigma$

$$
x_i \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma)
$$

This could be achieved, for example, by sampling from a normal distribution with unit
standard deviation, a function that typically exists in any computer language, then
multiplying by $\sigma$

$$
x_i = \sigma \eta
$$

where $\eta \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)$

Now imagine that instead of an independent normal distribution you wish to sample
$\mathbf{x} = [x_1, x_2, ..., x_n]$ from a multivariate normal distribution with some
covariance matrix $\Sigma$

$$
\mathbf{x} \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)
$$

We can achive this in practice by using the Cholesky decomposition. A covariance
matrix is a symmetic positive semidefinite matrix (i.e. $x^T \Sigma x \ge 0$}, and
therefore can be decomposed into $\Sigma = LL^T$. We can then draw a sample from
$\mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)$ by scaling an independently generated random vector
by $L$

$$
\mathbf{x} = L \mathbf{\eta}
$$

where each element of the vector $\eta$ is $\eta_i \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)$.

Write Python code to randomly sample an n-dimensional vector $x$ from

1. an independent normal distribution with variance $\sigma_1^2$.

2. a multivariate normal distribution using a covariance matrix $\Sigma_{ij} =
   \sigma_1^2 \exp{(-(i- j)^2 / \sigma_2^2)}$. Try different values for the magnitute
   $\sigma_1$, and lenghtscale $\sigma_2$ parameters and their effect on the sampled
   $\mathbf{x}$. Hint: while the expression for $\Sigma$ is guarrenteed to be positive
   definte for all values of $\sigma_1$ and $\sigma_2$, numerical round-off can mean
   that the Cholesky decomposition can fail. To guarrentee a positive definite
   $\Sigma$, try adding a small amount (e.g. 1e-5) to the diagonal of $\Sigma$. This
   is equivilent to adding a very small amount of independent normal noise to
   $\mathbf{x}$.

:::solution

```python
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pylab as plt
import scipy
import scipy.linalg

n = 100
xs = np.arange(0, n)

def construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2):
    K = sigma1**2 * np.exp(
        -(xs[:, np.newaxis] - xs[:, np.newaxis].T)**2 / sigma2**2
    )
    K += 1e-5 * np.eye(n)
    return K

def sample_zero_mean_random_field(covariance_matrix):
    L, _ = scipy.linalg.cho_factor(covariance_matrix, lower=True)
    indep_random_sample = np.random.normal(size=n)
    return np.dot(np.tril(L), indep_random_sample)

sigma1 = 1.0
sigma2 = 10.0
K1 = sigma1**2 * np.eye(n)
K2 = construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2)

plt.plot(sample_zero_mean_random_field(K1))
plt.plot(sample_zero_mean_random_field(K2))
plt.show()
```

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=likelihood title="Likelihood"}

Now imagine that we have a vector of measurements $\mathbf{x}$, and we assume that a
suitable model for these measurements is that they are generated from a zero-mean,
multivariate normal distribuion, i.e.

$$
\mathbf{x} \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)
$$

We assume that the covariance matrix is of the following form, with two parameters
$\mathbf{\theta} = (\sigma_1, \sigma_2)$.

$$
\Sigma_{ij} = \sigma_1^2 \exp{(-(i- j)^2/ \sigma_2^2)}
$$

We can write down the _likelihood_ of the covariance parameters $\mathbf{\theta}$, given
a given dataset $\mathbf{x}$, by using the probability distribution function (PDF) for a
zero-mean multivariate normal distribution

$$
P(\mathbf{\theta} | \mathbf{x}) = (2 \pi)^{\frac{n}{2}} \text{
det}(\Sigma)^{\frac{1}{2}} \exp{\left( \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{x}^T \Sigma^{-1}
\mathbf{x}\right)}
$$

Typically we work with the log of the likelihood for numerical reasons, which is

$$
\mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{2} \log(|\Sigma|) + \mathbf{x}^T \Sigma^{-1} \mathbf{x} +
\frac{n}{2} \log(2\pi)
$$

Generate a simulated dataset $\mathbf{x}$ using your code for question (2) using
"true" parameters $\mathbf{\theta}^t = (\sigma^t_1, \sigma^t_2)$. Then calculate
the log-likelihood using the Cholesky decomposition to efficiently calculate the
log determinant and the inverse of the covariance matrix. Vary $\mathbf{\theta}$
and satisfy yourself that the maximum of the likelihood occurs at your "true"
parameters. In practice, when you don't know the true parameters, you could use an
optimisation algorithm to automatically determine the _most likely_ model
parameters that give rise to your data.

:::solution

```python
def log_likelihood(sigma1, sigma2, x):
    K = construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2)
    L, lower = scipy.linalg.cho_factor(K, lower=True)

    logdet = 2 * np.sum(np.log(np.diag(L)))
    xinvSx = x.dot(scipy.linalg.cho_solve((L, lower), x))

    return -0.5 * (logdet + xinvSx)

sigma1 = np.linspace(0.5, 1.5, 100)
sigma2 = np.linspace(5.0, 15.0, 100)
Sigma1, Sigma2 = np.meshgrid(sigma1, sigma2)
x = sample_zero_mean_random_field(K2)

L = np.vectorize(log_likelihood, excluded=['x'])(Sigma1, Sigma2, x=x)
max_log_likelihood = log_likelihood(1, 10, x)
levels = np.linspace(0.9 * max_log_likelihood, max_log_likelihood, 5)

plt.clf()
contours = plt.contour(Sigma1, Sigma2, L, levels=levels, colors='black')
plt.clabel(contours, inline=True, fontsize=8)

plt.imshow(L, extent=[0.5, 1.5, 5.0, 15.0], origin='lower',
           cmap='RdGy', alpha=0.5, vmin=levels[0], aspect='auto')
c = plt.colorbar()
c.set_label(r'$\mathcal{L}$')
plt.xlabel(r'$\sigma_1$')
plt.ylabel(r'$\sigma_2$')
plt.show()
```

:::
::::

Commit message:

Add learning outcomes to linear algebra solvers course (#177)
* #169 added learning outcomes to matrix form of equations chapter

* #169 added learning outcomes to LU decomposition chapter

* #169 added learning outcomes to Cholesky decomposition chapter

* #169 added learning outcomes to QR decomposition chapter

* Clarified QR decomposition learning outcome

Students don't actually build a QR decomposition (just use a library)

Co-authored-by: Martin Robinson <martinjrobins@gmail.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Martin Robinson <martinjrobins@gmail.com>

scientific_computing/linear_algebra/06-Cholesky-decomposition.md, after:

---
name: Cholesky decomposition
dependsOn: ["scientific_computing.linear_algebra.04-LU-decomposition"]
tags: []
learningOutcomes:
  - Recognise symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices as a special case for matrix decomposition
  - Understand Cholesky decomposition as a method to efficiently decompose SPD matrices
  - Understand the relationship between LU decomposition and Cholesky decomposition
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from material by Martin Robinson from the "Scientific Computing" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Cholesky decomposition

_Symmetric positive definite_ matrices are a very special type of matrix that often
arise in practice. From a computational point of view, this class of matrix is very
attractive because it is possible to decompose a symmetic positive definite matrix $A$
very efficiently into a single lower triangular matrix $G$ so that $A = GG^T$.

A matrix $A$ is positive definite if $x^T A x > 0$ for any nonzero $x \in \mathbb{R}$.
This statement by itself is not terribly intuitive, so lets look at also look at an
example of a $2 \times 2$ matrix

$$
A = \left(\begin{matrix}
a_{11} & a_{12} \\
a_{21} & a_{22}
\end{matrix}\right)
$$

If $A$ is symmetic positive definite (SPD) then

$$
\begin{aligned}
x &= (1, 0)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} > 0 \\
x &= (0, 1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{22} > 0 \\
x &= (1, 1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} + 2a_{12} + a_{22} > 0 \\
x &= (1,-1)^T \Rightarrow x^T A x = a_{11} - 2a_{12} + a_{22} > 0 \\
\end{aligned}
$$

The first two equations show that the diagonal entries of $A$ must be positive, and
combining the last two equations imply $|a_{12}| \le (a_{11} + a_{22}) / 2$, that is
that the matrix has much of its "mass" on the diagonal (note: this is _not_ the same as
the matrix being diagonally dominant, where $|a_{ii}| > \sum_{i=1...n,j \ne i}
|a_{ij}|$). These two observations for our $2 \times 2$ matrix also apply for a general
$n \times n$ SPD matrix. One of the very nice consequences of this "weighty" diagonal
for SPD matrices is that it precludes the need for pivoting.

It can be shown that if $A$ is a SPD matrix, then the $LDL^T$ decomposition exists and
that $D = \text{diag}(d_1, ..., d_n)$ has positive diagonal entries. Therefore, it is
straightforward to see that $LDL^T$ = $GG^T$, where $G = L \text{diag}(\sqrt{d_1}, ...,
\sqrt{d_n})$. The decomposition $A = GG^T$ is known as the cholesky decomposition and
can be efficiently constructed in $n^3 / 3$ flops. There are a number of algorithms to
construct this decomposition, and both the [wikipedia
entry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition) and Chapter 4.2 of the
Matrix Computations textbook by Golub and Van Loan gives a number of different varients.

Note that a $LDL$ decomposition can also be used to calculate a cholesky decomposition,
and this could be more efficient approach since (a) the SPD structure means that we can
neglect pivoting in the $LDL$ decomposition, and (b) the $LDL$ decomposition does not
requiring taking the square root of the diagonal elements.

### Other Reading

- Golub, G. H. & Van Loan, C. F. Matrix Computations, 3rd Ed. (Johns Hopkins University
  Press, 1996). Chapter 4.2
- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cholesky_decomposition>

### Software

[`scipy.linalg.cholesky`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cholesky.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_factor`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_factor.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_solve`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_solve.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cholesky_banded`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cholesky_banded.html)

[`scipy.linalg.cho_solve_banded`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.linalg.cho_solve_banded.html)

## Problems

::::challenge{id=sampling-random-fields title="Sampling random fields"}

Imagine that we wanted to sample an array of values $x_i$, for $i = 1...n$, where each
value is sampled from an independent normal distribution with standard deviation
$\sigma$

$$
x_i \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma)
$$

This could be achieved, for example, by sampling from a normal distribution with unit
standard deviation, a function that typically exists in any computer language, then
multiplying by $\sigma$

$$
x_i = \sigma \eta
$$

where $\eta \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)$

Now imagine that instead of an independent normal distribution you wish to sample
$\mathbf{x} = [x_1, x_2, ..., x_n]$ from a multivariate normal distribution with some
covariance matrix $\Sigma$

$$
\mathbf{x} \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)
$$

We can achive this in practice by using the Cholesky decomposition. A covariance
matrix is a symmetic positive semidefinite matrix (i.e. $x^T \Sigma x \ge 0$}, and
therefore can be decomposed into $\Sigma = LL^T$. We can then draw a sample from
$\mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)$ by scaling an independently generated random vector
by $L$

$$
\mathbf{x} = L \mathbf{\eta}
$$

where each element of the vector $\eta$ is $\eta_i \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)$.

Write Python code to randomly sample an n-dimensional vector $x$ from

1. an independent normal distribution with variance $\sigma_1^2$.

2. a multivariate normal distribution using a covariance matrix $\Sigma_{ij} =
   \sigma_1^2 \exp{(-(i- j)^2 / \sigma_2^2)}$. Try different values for the magnitute
   $\sigma_1$, and lenghtscale $\sigma_2$ parameters and their effect on the sampled
   $\mathbf{x}$. Hint: while the expression for $\Sigma$ is guarrenteed to be positive
   definte for all values of $\sigma_1$ and $\sigma_2$, numerical round-off can mean
   that the Cholesky decomposition can fail. To guarrentee a positive definite
   $\Sigma$, try adding a small amount (e.g. 1e-5) to the diagonal of $\Sigma$. This
   is equivilent to adding a very small amount of independent normal noise to
   $\mathbf{x}$.

:::solution

```python
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pylab as plt
import scipy
import scipy.linalg

n = 100
xs = np.arange(0, n)

def construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2):
    K = sigma1**2 * np.exp(
        -(xs[:, np.newaxis] - xs[:, np.newaxis].T)**2 / sigma2**2
    )
    K += 1e-5 * np.eye(n)
    return K

def sample_zero_mean_random_field(covariance_matrix):
    L, _ = scipy.linalg.cho_factor(covariance_matrix, lower=True)
    indep_random_sample = np.random.normal(size=n)
    return np.dot(np.tril(L), indep_random_sample)

sigma1 = 1.0
sigma2 = 10.0
K1 = sigma1**2 * np.eye(n)
K2 = construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2)

plt.plot(sample_zero_mean_random_field(K1))
plt.plot(sample_zero_mean_random_field(K2))
plt.show()
```

:::
::::

::::challenge{id=likelihood title="Likelihood"}

Now imagine that we have a vector of measurements $\mathbf{x}$, and we assume that a
suitable model for these measurements is that they are generated from a zero-mean,
multivariate normal distribuion, i.e.

$$
\mathbf{x} \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \Sigma)
$$

We assume that the covariance matrix is of the following form, with two parameters
$\mathbf{\theta} = (\sigma_1, \sigma_2)$.

$$
\Sigma_{ij} = \sigma_1^2 \exp{(-(i- j)^2/ \sigma_2^2)}
$$

We can write down the _likelihood_ of the covariance parameters $\mathbf{\theta}$, given
a given dataset $\mathbf{x}$, by using the probability distribution function (PDF) for a
zero-mean multivariate normal distribution

$$
P(\mathbf{\theta} | \mathbf{x}) = (2 \pi)^{\frac{n}{2}} \text{
det}(\Sigma)^{\frac{1}{2}} \exp{\left( \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{x}^T \Sigma^{-1}
\mathbf{x}\right)}
$$

Typically we work with the log of the likelihood for numerical reasons, which is

$$
\mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{2} \log(|\Sigma|) + \mathbf{x}^T \Sigma^{-1} \mathbf{x} +
\frac{n}{2} \log(2\pi)
$$

Generate a simulated dataset $\mathbf{x}$ using your code for question (2) using
"true" parameters $\mathbf{\theta}^t = (\sigma^t_1, \sigma^t_2)$. Then calculate
the log-likelihood using the Cholesky decomposition to efficiently calculate the
log determinant and the inverse of the covariance matrix. Vary $\mathbf{\theta}$
and satisfy yourself that the maximum of the likelihood occurs at your "true"
parameters. In practice, when you don't know the true parameters, you could use an
optimisation algorithm to automatically determine the _most likely_ model
parameters that give rise to your data.

:::solution

```python
def log_likelihood(sigma1, sigma2, x):
    K = construct_covariance(sigma1, sigma2)
    L, lower = scipy.linalg.cho_factor(K, lower=True)

    logdet = 2 * np.sum(np.log(np.diag(L)))
    xinvSx = x.dot(scipy.linalg.cho_solve((L, lower), x))

    return -0.5 * (logdet + xinvSx)

sigma1 = np.linspace(0.5, 1.5, 100)
sigma2 = np.linspace(5.0, 15.0, 100)
Sigma1, Sigma2 = np.meshgrid(sigma1, sigma2)
x = sample_zero_mean_random_field(K2)

L = np.vectorize(log_likelihood, excluded=['x'])(Sigma1, Sigma2, x=x)
max_log_likelihood = log_likelihood(1, 10, x)
levels = np.linspace(0.9 * max_log_likelihood, max_log_likelihood, 5)

plt.clf()
contours = plt.contour(Sigma1, Sigma2, L, levels=levels, colors='black')
plt.clabel(contours, inline=True, fontsize=8)

plt.imshow(L, extent=[0.5, 1.5, 5.0, 15.0], origin='lower',
           cmap='RdGy', alpha=0.5, vmin=levels[0], aspect='auto')
c = plt.colorbar()
c.set_label(r'$\mathcal{L}$')
plt.xlabel(r'$\sigma_1$')
plt.ylabel(r'$\sigma_2$')
plt.show()
```

:::
::::
