software_project_management/collaboration/index.md, before:

---
name: Collaboration on GitHub
id: collaboration
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.version_control]
files: [refresher.md, workflows.md, issues.md]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      "Aleksandra Nenadic, Steve Crouch, James Graham, et al. (2022). carpentries-incubator/python-intermediate-development: beta (beta). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057"
    url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057
    image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0

summary: |
  This course will show you how to use Git for effective collaboration with others
  using the GitHub platform. After completion of the course, you will be able to
  contribute to projects on GitHub, including opening issues and pull requests.
---

This course will show you how to use Git for effective collaboration with others
using the GitHub platform. After completion of the course, you will be able to
contribute to projects on GitHub, including opening issues and pull requests.

[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to save every change made to a
(software) project, allowing others to collaborate and contribute. In this course,
we use Git to version control our code in conjunction with [GitHub](https://github.com/) for code backup and sharing.
GitHub is one of the leading integrated products and
social platforms for modern software development, monitoring and management - it will help us with
version control, issue management, code review, code testing/Continuous Integration, and collaborative development.

Commit message:

Add course-level software project management objectives (#210)
* fix: adds course-level learning outcomes for collaboration with Github

* fix: adds course-level learning outcomes for continuous integration

* fix: minor formatting issues

software_project_management/collaboration/index.md, after:

---
name: Collaboration on GitHub
id: collaboration
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.version_control]
files: [refresher.md, workflows.md, issues.md]
learningOutcomes:
  - Refresh your knowledge of Git and creating and managing branches.
  - Use the feature branch workflow to collaborate with others on the same repository.
  - Learn about code reviews and pull requests on GitHub.
  - Understand and create GitHub issues to manage bug reports and feature requests.
attribution:
  - citation: >
      "Aleksandra Nenadic, Steve Crouch, James Graham, et al. (2022). carpentries-incubator/python-intermediate-development: beta (beta). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057"
    url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6532057
    image: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/python-intermediate-development/assets/img/incubator-logo-blue.svg
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0

summary: |
  This course will show you how to use Git for effective collaboration with others
  using the GitHub platform. After completion of the course, you will be able to
  contribute to projects on GitHub, including opening issues and pull requests.
---

This course will show you how to use Git for effective collaboration with others
using the GitHub platform. After completion of the course, you will be able to
contribute to projects on GitHub, including opening issues and pull requests.

[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to save every change made to a
(software) project, allowing others to collaborate and contribute. In this course,
we use Git to version control our code in conjunction with [GitHub](https://github.com/) for code backup and sharing.
GitHub is one of the leading integrated products and
social platforms for modern software development, monitoring and management - it will help us with
version control, issue management, code review, code testing/Continuous Integration, and collaborative development.
