technology_and_tooling/ide/index.md, before:

---
name: IDEs
id: ide
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.bash_shell]
files: [python.md, cpp.md]
summary: |
  Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)provide programmers with a complete development environment to
  write, edit, debug, and deploy their code. This course introduces the popular VSCode IDE, both for Python
  and C++ development.
attribution:
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Integrated Development Environments, commonly known as IDEs, are software
applications that provide programmers with a complete development environment to
write, edit, debug, and deploy their code. IDEs are designed
to enhance productivity and simplify the development process by providing a
unified and streamlined interface for all stages of the development cycle.

IDEs typically include a source code editor, a build automation tool, a
debugger, and other features such as version control integration, syntax
highlighting, and auto-completion. Often an plug-in system is used as wel so
that new functionality (i.e. support for additional languages or tools), can be
provided via third-party plugins.

This course provides an introduction to the popular [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com) IDE, both for Python
and C++ development.

## Installing VSCode

Commit message:

Adds learning outcomes for IDEs course

technology_and_tooling/ide/index.md, after:

---
name: IDEs
id: ide
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.bash_shell]
files: [python.md, cpp.md]
summary: |
  Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)provide programmers with a complete development environment to
  write, edit, debug, and deploy their code. This course introduces the popular VSCode IDE, both for Python
  and C++ development.
learningOutcomes:
  - Find out how to install VSCode.
  - Learn how to set up VSCode for Python development and use virtual environments.
  - Discover how to use VSCode to write and compile C++ code. 
attribution:
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Integrated Development Environments, commonly known as IDEs, are software
applications that provide programmers with a complete development environment to
write, edit, debug, and deploy their code. IDEs are designed
to enhance productivity and simplify the development process by providing a
unified and streamlined interface for all stages of the development cycle.

IDEs typically include a source code editor, a build automation tool, a
debugger, and other features such as version control integration, syntax
highlighting, and auto-completion. Often an plug-in system is used as wel so
that new functionality (i.e. support for additional languages or tools), can be
provided via third-party plugins.

This course provides an introduction to the popular [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com) IDE, both for Python
and C++ development.

## Installing VSCode
