software_architecture_and_design/functional/index.md, before:

---
id: functional
name: Functional Programming
dependsOn: [software_architecture_and_design.procedural]
files:
  [
    [side_effects_cpp.md, recursion_cpp.md, higher_order_functions_cpp.md],
    [side_effects_python.md, recursion_python.md,higher_order_functions_python.md],
  ]
summary: |
  Functional Programming is based around the idea that programs are constructed
  by applying and composing/chaining **functions**. This course will introduce
  you to the basics of functional programming in either Python or C++.
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from the "Software Engineering" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Functional programming is a programming paradigm where programs are constructed
by applying and composing/chaining **functions**. Functional programming is
based on the [mathematical definition of a
function](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_(mathematics)>) `f()`, which
applies a transformation to some input data giving us some other data as a
result (i.e. a mapping from input `x` to output `f(x)`). Thus, a program written
in a functional style becomes a series of transformations on data which are
performed to produce a desired output. Each function (transformation) taken by
itself is simple and straightforward to understand; complexity is handled by
composing functions in various ways.

Often when we use the term function we are referring to a construct containing a
block of code which performs a particular task and can be reused. We have
already seen this in procedural programming - so how are functions in functional
programming different? The key difference is that functional programming is
focussed on **what** transformations are done to the data, rather than **how**
these transformations are performed (i.e. a detailed sequence of steps which
update the state of the code to reach a desired state).

:::callout

In his introduction to functional programming in Advanced R, Hadley Wickham gives a good summary of the style:

> It’s hard to describe exactly what a functional style is, but generally I think it means decomposing a big problem into smaller pieces, then solving each piece with a function or combination of functions.
> When using a functional style, you strive to decompose components of the problem into isolated functions that operate independently.
> Each function taken by itself is simple and straightforward to understand; complexity is handled by composing functions in various ways.
>
> -- Hadley Wickham - [Functional Style](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/fp.html)
> :::

Commit message:

fix: adds course-level learning outcomes for functional programming

software_architecture_and_design/functional/index.md, after:

---
id: functional
name: Functional Programming
dependsOn: [software_architecture_and_design.procedural]
files:
  [
    [side_effects_cpp.md, recursion_cpp.md, higher_order_functions_cpp.md],
    [side_effects_python.md, recursion_python.md,higher_order_functions_python.md],
  ]
learningOutcomes:
  - Learn about side effects and the benefits of functional code.
  - Gain knowledge of recursion and examples of where it might be used.
  - Learn about lambda functions and higher-order functions.
summary: |
  Functional Programming is based around the idea that programs are constructed
  by applying and composing/chaining **functions**. This course will introduce
  you to the basics of functional programming in either Python or C++.
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from the "Software Engineering" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Functional programming is a programming paradigm where programs are constructed
by applying and composing/chaining **functions**. Functional programming is
based on the [mathematical definition of a
function](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_(mathematics)>) `f()`, which
applies a transformation to some input data giving us some other data as a
result (i.e. a mapping from input `x` to output `f(x)`). Thus, a program written
in a functional style becomes a series of transformations on data which are
performed to produce a desired output. Each function (transformation) taken by
itself is simple and straightforward to understand; complexity is handled by
composing functions in various ways.

Often when we use the term function we are referring to a construct containing a
block of code which performs a particular task and can be reused. We have
already seen this in procedural programming - so how are functions in functional
programming different? The key difference is that functional programming is
focussed on **what** transformations are done to the data, rather than **how**
these transformations are performed (i.e. a detailed sequence of steps which
update the state of the code to reach a desired state).

:::callout

In his introduction to functional programming in Advanced R, Hadley Wickham gives a good summary of the style:

> It’s hard to describe exactly what a functional style is, but generally I think it means decomposing a big problem into smaller pieces, then solving each piece with a function or combination of functions.
> When using a functional style, you strive to decompose components of the problem into isolated functions that operate independently.
> Each function taken by itself is simple and straightforward to understand; complexity is handled by composing functions in various ways.
>
> -- Hadley Wickham - [Functional Style](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/fp.html)
> :::
