technology_and_tooling/snakemake/advanced.md, before:

---
name: "Advanced: Decorating"
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.snakemake.basics]
tags: [snakemake]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      Mölder, F., Jablonski, K.P., Letcher, B., Hall, M.B., Tomkins-Tinch,
      C.H., Sochat, V., Forster, J., Lee, S., Twardziok, S.O., Kanitz, A.,
      Wilm, A., Holtgrewe, M., Rahmann, S., Nahnsen, S., Köster, J., 2021.
      Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake. F1000Res 10, 33.
      Revision c7ae161c.
    url: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/advanced.html
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/snakemake/snakemake/main/snakemake/report/template/logo.svg
    license: MIT license
---

# Advanced: Decorating the example workflow

Now that the basic concepts of Snakemake have been illustrated, we can
introduce some advanced functionality.

## Step 1: Specifying the number of used threads

For some tools, it is advisable to use more than one thread in order to
speed up the computation. **Snakemake can be made aware of the threads a
rule needs** with the `threads` directive. In our example workflow, it
makes sense to use multiple threads for the rule `bwa_map`:

```yaml
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

The number of threads can be propagated to the shell command with the
familiar braces notation (i.e. `{threads}`). If no `threads` directive
is given, a rule is assumed to need 1 thread.

When a workflow is executed, **the number of threads the jobs need is
considered by the Snakemake scheduler**. In particular, the scheduler
ensures that the sum of the threads of all jobs running at the same time
does not exceed a given number of available CPU cores. This number is
given with the `--cores` command line argument, which is mandatory for
`snakemake` calls that actually run the workflow. For example

```console
snakemake --cores 10
```

:::callout

Apart from the very common thread resource, Snakemake provides a
`resources` directive that can be used to **specify arbitrary
resources**, e.g., memory usage or auxiliary computing devices like
GPUs. Similar to threads, these can be considered by the scheduler when
an available amount of that resource is given with the command line
argument `--resources` (see `snakefiles-resources`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"}).

:::

would execute the workflow with 10 cores. Since the rule `bwa_map` needs
8 threads, only one job of the rule can run at a time, and the Snakemake
scheduler will try to saturate the remaining cores with other jobs like,
e.g., `samtools_sort`. The threads directive in a rule is interpreted as
a maximum: when **less cores than threads** are provided, the number of
threads a rule uses will be **reduced to the number of given cores**.

If `--cores` is given without a number, all available cores are used.

::::challenge{id=use_threads title="Exercise"}

With the flag `--forceall` you can enforce a complete re-execution
of the workflow. Combine this flag with different values for
`--cores` and examine how the scheduler selects jobs to run in
parallel.

::::

## Step 2: Config files

So far, we specified which samples to consider by providing a Python
list in the Snakefile. However, often you want your workflow to be
customizable, so that it can easily be adapted to new data. For this
purpose, Snakemake provides a [config file
mechanism](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/snakefiles/configuration.html).
Config files can be written in [JSON](https://json.org) or
[YAML](https://yaml.org), and are used with the `configfile` directive.
In our example workflow, we add the line

```yaml
configfile: "config.yaml"
```

to the top of the Snakefile. Snakemake will load the config file and
store its contents into a globally available
[dictionary](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries)
named `config`. In our case, it makes sense to specify the samples in
`config.yaml` as

```yaml
samples:
  A: data/samples/A.fastq
  B: data/samples/B.fastq
```

Now, we can remove the statement defining `SAMPLES` from the Snakefile
and change the rule `bcftools_call` to

```yaml
rule bcftools_call:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam", sample=config["samples"]),
        bai=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai", sample=config["samples"])
    output:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | "
        "bcftools call -mv - > {output}"
```

## Step 3: Input functions

Since we have stored the path to the FASTQ files in the config file, we
can also generalize the rule `bwa_map` to use these paths. This case is
different to the rule `bcftools_call` we modified above. To understand
this, it is important to know that Snakemake workflows are executed in
three phases.

1. In the **initialization** phase, the files defining the workflow are
   parsed and all rules are instantiated.
2. In the **DAG** phase, the directed acyclic dependency graph of all
   jobs is built by filling wildcards and matching input files to
   output files.
3. In the **scheduling** phase, the DAG of jobs is executed, with jobs
   started according to the available resources.

The expand functions in the list of input files of the rule
`bcftools_call` are executed during the initialization phase. In this
phase, we don\'t know about jobs, wildcard values and rule dependencies.
Hence, we cannot determine the FASTQ paths for rule `bwa_map` from the
config file in this phase, because we don\'t even know which jobs will
be generated from that rule. Instead, we need to defer the determination
of input files to the DAG phase. This can be achieved by specifying an
**input function** instead of a string as inside of the input directive.
For the rule `bwa_map` this works as follows:

```snakemake
def get_bwa_map_input_fastqs(wildcards):
    return config["samples"][wildcards.sample]

rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

:::callout

Snakemake does not automatically rerun jobs when new input files are
added as in the excercise below. However, you can get a list of output
files that are affected by such changes with
`snakemake --list-input-changes`. To trigger a rerun, this bit of bash
magic helps:

```console
snakemake -n --forcerun $(snakemake --list-input-changes)
```

:::

Any normal function would work as well. Input functions take as **single
argument** a `wildcards` object, that allows to access the wildcards
values via attributes (here `wildcards.sample`). They have to **return a
string or a list of strings**, that are interpreted as paths to input
files (here, we return the path that is stored for the sample in the
config file). Input functions are evaluated once the wildcard values of
a job are determined.

::::challenge{id=add_sample title="Exercise"}

In the `data/samples` folder, there is an additional sample
`C.fastq`. Add that sample to the config file and see how Snakemake
wants to recompute the part of the workflow belonging to the new
sample, when invoking with `snakemake -n --forcerun bcftools_call`.

::::

## Step 4: Rule parameters

Sometimes, shell commands are not only composed of input and output
files and some static flags. In particular, it can happen that
additional parameters need to be set depending on the wildcard values of
the job. For this, Snakemake allows to **define arbitrary parameters**
for rules with the `params` directive. In our workflow, it is reasonable
to annotate aligned reads with so-called read groups, that contain
metadata like the sample name. We modify the rule `bwa_map` accordingly:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

:::callout

The `params` directive can also take functions like in Step 3 to defer
initialization to the DAG phase. In contrast to input functions, these
can optionally take additional arguments `input`, `output`, `threads`,
and `resources`.

:::

Similar to input and output files, `params` can be accessed from the
shell command, the Python based `run` block, or the script directive
(see `tutorial-script`).

::::challenge{id=add_params title="Exercise"}

Variant calling can consider a lot of parameters. A particularly
important one is the prior mutation rate (1e-3 per default). It is
set via the flag `-P` of the `bcftools call` command. Consider
making this flag configurable via adding a new key to the config
file and using the `params` directive in the rule `bcftools_call` to
propagate it to the shell command.

::::

## Step 5: Logging

When executing a large workflow, it is usually desirable to store the
logging output of each job into a separate file, instead of just
printing all logging output to the terminal\-\--when multiple jobs are
run in parallel, this would result in chaotic output. For this purpose,
Snakemake allows to **specify log files** for rules. Log files are
defined via the `log` directive and handled similarly to output files,
but they are not subject of rule matching and are not cleaned up when a
job fails. We modify our rule `bwa_map` as follows:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"
```

:::callout

It is best practice to store all log files in a subdirectory `logs/`,
prefixed by the rule or tool name.

:::

The shell command is modified to [collect STDERR
output](https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/io-redirection.html) of both `bwa`
and `samtools` and pipe it into the file referred to by `{log}`. Log
files must contain exactly the same wildcards as the output files to
avoid file name clashes between different jobs of the same rule.

::::challenge{id=add_logging title="Exercise"}

- Add a log directive to the `bcftools_call` rule as well.
- Time to re-run the whole workflow (remember the command line flags
  to force re-execution). See how log files are created for variant
  calling and read mapping.
- The ability to track the provenance of each generated result is an
  important step towards reproducible analyses. Apart from the
  `report` functionality discussed before, Snakemake can summarize
  various provenance information for all output files of the workflow.
  The flag `--summary` prints a table associating each output file
  with the rule used to generate it, the creation date and optionally
  the version of the tool used for creation is provided. Further, the
  table informs about updated input files and changes to the source
  code of the rule after creation of the output file. Invoke Snakemake
  with `--summary` to examine the information for our example.

::::

## Step 6: Temporary and protected files

In our workflow, we create two BAM files for each sample, namely the
output of the rules `bwa_map` and `samtools_sort`. When not dealing with
examples, the underlying data is usually huge. Hence, the resulting BAM
files need a lot of disk space and their creation takes some time. To
save disk space, you can **mark output files as temporary**. Snakemake
will delete the marked files for you, once all the consuming jobs (that
need it as input) have been executed. We use this mechanism for the
output file of the rule `bwa_map`:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        temp("mapped_reads/{sample}.bam")
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"
```

This results in the deletion of the BAM file once the corresponding
`samtools_sort` job has been executed. Since the creation of BAM files
via read mapping and sorting is computationally expensive, it is
reasonable to **protect** the final BAM file **from accidental deletion
or modification**. We modify the rule `samtools_sort` to mark its output
file as `protected`:

```snakemake
rule samtools_sort:
    input:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        protected("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam")
    shell:
        "samtools sort -T sorted_reads/{wildcards.sample} "
        "-O bam {input} > {output}"
```

After successful execution of the job, Snakemake will write-protect the
output file in the filesystem, so that it can\'t be overwritten or
deleted by accident.

::::challenge{id=add_temporaries title="Exercise"}

- Re-execute the whole workflow and observe how Snakemake handles the
  temporary and protected files.
- Run Snakemake with the target `mapped_reads/A.bam`. Although the
  file is marked as temporary, you will see that Snakemake does not
  delete it because it is specified as a target file.
- Try to re-execute the whole workflow again with the dry-run option.
  You will see that it fails (as intended) because Snakemake cannot
  overwrite the protected output files.

::::

## Summary

For this advanced part of the tutorial, we have now created a
`config.yaml` configuration file:

```yaml
samples:
  A: data/samples/A.fastq
  B: data/samples/B.fastq

prior_mutation_rate: 0.001
```

With this, the final version of our workflow in the `Snakefile` looks
like this:

```snakemake
configfile: "config.yaml"


rule all:
    input:
        "plots/quals.svg"


def get_bwa_map_input_fastqs(wildcards):
    return config["samples"][wildcards.sample]


rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        temp("mapped_reads/{sample}.bam")
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"


rule samtools_sort:
    input:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        protected("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam")
    shell:
        "samtools sort -T sorted_reads/{wildcards.sample} "
        "-O bam {input} > {output}"


rule samtools_index:
    input:
        "sorted_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai"
    shell:
        "samtools index {input}"


rule bcftools_call:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam", sample=config["samples"]),
        bai=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai", sample=config["samples"])
    output:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    params:
        rate=config["prior_mutation_rate"]
    log:
        "logs/bcftools_call/all.log"
    shell:
        "(bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | "
        "bcftools call -mv -P {params.rate} - > {output}) 2> {log}"


rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "plots/quals.svg"
    script:
        "scripts/plot-quals.py"
```

Commit message:

[Revamp] Workflows with Snakemake (#146)
* Update following Snakemake 8 official docs

* Mark codeblock as snakemake

* Remove mention of Atom editor

* Fix image not loading (basics, Step 5)

* Fix linting

* Remove snakemake import from code sample

* Annotate code sample as snakemake to avoid linting error

technology_and_tooling/snakemake/advanced.md, after:

---
name: "Advanced: Decorating"
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.snakemake.basics]
tags: [snakemake]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      Mölder, F., Jablonski, K.P., Letcher, B., Hall, M.B., Tomkins-Tinch,
      C.H., Sochat, V., Forster, J., Lee, S., Twardziok, S.O., Kanitz, A.,
      Wilm, A., Holtgrewe, M., Rahmann, S., Nahnsen, S., Köster, J., 2021.
      Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake. F1000Res 10, 33.
      Revision c7ae161c.
    url: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/advanced.html
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/snakemake/snakemake/main/snakemake/report/template/logo.svg
    license: MIT license
---

# Advanced: Decorating the example workflow

Now that the basic concepts of Snakemake have been illustrated, we can
introduce some advanced functionality.

## Step 1: Specifying the number of used threads

For some tools, it is advisable to use more than one thread in order to
speed up the computation. **Snakemake can be made aware of the threads a
rule needs** with the `threads` directive. In our example workflow, it
makes sense to use multiple threads for the rule `bwa_map`:

```yaml
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

The number of threads can be propagated to the shell command with the
familiar braces notation (i.e. `{threads}`). If no `threads` directive
is given, a rule is assumed to need 1 thread.

When a workflow is executed, **the number of threads the jobs need is
considered by the Snakemake scheduler**. In particular, the scheduler
ensures that the sum of the threads of all jobs running at the same time
does not exceed a given number of available CPU cores. This number is
given with the `--cores` command line argument, which is mandatory for
`snakemake` calls that actually run the workflow. For example

```console
snakemake --cores 10
```

:::callout

Apart from the very common thread resource, Snakemake provides a
`resources` directive that can be used to **specify arbitrary
resources**, e.g., memory usage or auxiliary computing devices like
GPUs. Similar to threads, these can be considered by the scheduler when
an available amount of that resource is given with the command line
argument `--resources` (see `snakefiles-resources`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"}).

:::

would execute the workflow with 10 cores. Since the rule `bwa_map` needs
8 threads, only one job of the rule can run at a time, and the Snakemake
scheduler will try to saturate the remaining cores with other jobs like,
e.g., `samtools_sort`. The threads directive in a rule is interpreted as
a maximum: when **less cores than threads** are provided, the number of
threads a rule uses will be **reduced to the number of given cores**.

If `--cores` is given without a number, all available cores are used.

::::challenge{id=use_threads title="Exercise"}

With the flag `--forceall` you can enforce a complete re-execution
of the workflow. Combine this flag with different values for
`--cores` and examine how the scheduler selects jobs to run in
parallel.

::::

## Step 2: Config files

So far, we specified which samples to consider by providing a Python
list in the Snakefile. However, often you want your workflow to be
customizable, so that it can easily be adapted to new data. For this
purpose, Snakemake provides a [config file
mechanism](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/snakefiles/configuration.html).
Config files can be written in [JSON](https://json.org) or
[YAML](https://yaml.org), and are used with the `configfile` directive.
In our example workflow, we add the line

```yaml
configfile: "config.yaml"
```

to the top of the Snakefile. Snakemake will load the config file and
store its contents into a globally available
[dictionary](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries)
named `config`. In our case, it makes sense to specify the samples in
`config.yaml` as

```yaml
samples:
  A: data/samples/A.fastq
  B: data/samples/B.fastq
```

Now, we can remove the statement defining `SAMPLES` from the Snakefile
and change the rule `bcftools_call` to

```yaml
rule bcftools_call:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam", sample=config["samples"]),
        bai=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai", sample=config["samples"])
    output:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | "
        "bcftools call -mv - > {output}"
```

## Step 3: Input functions

Since we have stored the path to the FASTQ files in the config file, we
can also generalize the rule `bwa_map` to use these paths. This case is
different to the rule `bcftools_call` we modified above. To understand
this, it is important to know that Snakemake workflows are executed in
three phases.

1. In the **initialization** phase, the files defining the workflow are
   parsed and all rules are instantiated.
2. In the **DAG** phase, the directed acyclic dependency graph of all
   jobs is built by filling wildcards and matching input files to
   output files.
3. In the **scheduling** phase, the DAG of jobs is executed, with jobs
   started according to the available resources.

The expand functions in the list of input files of the rule
`bcftools_call` are executed during the initialization phase. In this
phase, we don\'t know about jobs, wildcard values and rule dependencies.
Hence, we cannot determine the FASTQ paths for rule `bwa_map` from the
config file in this phase, because we don\'t even know which jobs will
be generated from that rule. Instead, we need to defer the determination
of input files to the DAG phase. This can be achieved by specifying an
**input function** instead of a string as inside of the input directive.
For the rule `bwa_map` this works as follows:

```snakemake
def get_bwa_map_input_fastqs(wildcards):
    return config["samples"][wildcards.sample]

rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

Any normal function would work as well. Input functions take as **single
argument** a `wildcards` object, that allows to access the wildcards
values via attributes (here `wildcards.sample`). They have to **return a
string or a list of strings**, that are interpreted as paths to input
files (here, we return the path that is stored for the sample in the
config file). Input functions are evaluated once the wildcard values of
a job are determined.

::::challenge{id=add_sample title="Exercise"}

In the `data/samples` folder, there is an additional sample
`C.fastq`. Add that sample to the config file and see how Snakemake
wants to recompute the part of the workflow belonging to the new
sample, when invoking with `snakemake -n --forcerun bcftools_call`.

::::

## Step 4: Rule parameters

Sometimes, shell commands are not only composed of input and output
files and some static flags. In particular, it can happen that
additional parameters need to be set depending on the wildcard values of
the job. For this, Snakemake allows to **define arbitrary parameters**
for rules with the `params` directive. In our workflow, it is reasonable
to annotate aligned reads with so-called read groups, that contain
metadata like the sample name. We modify the rule `bwa_map` accordingly:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

:::callout

The `params` directive can also take functions like in Step 3 to defer
initialization to the DAG phase. In contrast to input functions, these
can optionally take additional arguments `input`, `output`, `threads`,
and `resources`.

:::

Similar to input and output files, `params` can be accessed from the
shell command, the Python based `run` block, or the script directive
(see `tutorial-script`).

::::challenge{id=add_params title="Exercise"}

Variant calling can consider a lot of parameters. A particularly
important one is the prior mutation rate (1e-3 per default). It is
set via the flag `-P` of the `bcftools call` command. Consider
making this flag configurable via adding a new key to the config
file and using the `params` directive in the rule `bcftools_call` to
propagate it to the shell command.

::::

## Step 5: Logging

When executing a large workflow, it is usually desirable to store the
logging output of each job into a separate file, instead of just
printing all logging output to the terminal\-\--when multiple jobs are
run in parallel, this would result in chaotic output. For this purpose,
Snakemake allows to **specify log files** for rules. Log files are
defined via the `log` directive and handled similarly to output files,
but they are not subject of rule matching and are not cleaned up when a
job fails. We modify our rule `bwa_map` as follows:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"
```

:::callout

It is best practice to store all log files in a subdirectory `logs/`,
prefixed by the rule or tool name.

:::

The shell command is modified to [collect STDERR
output](https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/io-redirection.html) of both `bwa`
and `samtools` and pipe it into the file referred to by `{log}`. Log
files must contain exactly the same wildcards as the output files to
avoid file name clashes between different jobs of the same rule.

::::challenge{id=add_logging title="Exercise"}

- Add a log directive to the `bcftools_call` rule as well.
- Time to re-run the whole workflow (remember the command line flags
  to force re-execution). See how log files are created for variant
  calling and read mapping.
- The ability to track the provenance of each generated result is an
  important step towards reproducible analyses. Apart from the
  `report` functionality discussed before, Snakemake can summarize
  various provenance information for all output files of the workflow.
  The flag `--summary` prints a table associating each output file
  with the rule used to generate it, the creation date and optionally
  the version of the tool used for creation is provided. Further, the
  table informs about updated input files and changes to the source
  code of the rule after creation of the output file. Invoke Snakemake
  with `--summary` to examine the information for our example.

::::

## Step 6: Temporary and protected files

In our workflow, we create two BAM files for each sample, namely the
output of the rules `bwa_map` and `samtools_sort`. When not dealing with
examples, the underlying data is usually huge. Hence, the resulting BAM
files need a lot of disk space and their creation takes some time. To
save disk space, you can **mark output files as temporary**. Snakemake
will delete the marked files for you, once all the consuming jobs (that
need it as input) have been executed. We use this mechanism for the
output file of the rule `bwa_map`:

```snakemake
rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        temp("mapped_reads/{sample}.bam")
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"
```

This results in the deletion of the BAM file once the corresponding
`samtools_sort` job has been executed. Since the creation of BAM files
via read mapping and sorting is computationally expensive, it is
reasonable to **protect** the final BAM file **from accidental deletion
or modification**. We modify the rule `samtools_sort` to mark its output
file as `protected`:

```snakemake
rule samtools_sort:
    input:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        protected("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam")
    shell:
        "samtools sort -T sorted_reads/{wildcards.sample} "
        "-O bam {input} > {output}"
```

After successful execution of the job, Snakemake will write-protect the
output file in the filesystem, so that it can\'t be overwritten or
deleted by accident.

::::challenge{id=add_temporaries title="Exercise"}

- Re-execute the whole workflow and observe how Snakemake handles the
  temporary and protected files.
- Run Snakemake with the target `mapped_reads/A.bam`. Although the
  file is marked as temporary, you will see that Snakemake does not
  delete it because it is specified as a target file.
- Try to re-execute the whole workflow again with the dry-run option.
  You will see that it fails (as intended) because Snakemake cannot
  overwrite the protected output files.

After having a look at the summary, please go on with the [“additional features” part of the tutorial](additional_features).

::::

## Summary

For this advanced part of the tutorial, we have now created a
`config.yaml` configuration file:

```yaml
samples:
  A: data/samples/A.fastq
  B: data/samples/B.fastq

prior_mutation_rate: 0.001
```

With this, the final version of our workflow in the `Snakefile` looks
like this:

```snakemake
configfile: "config.yaml"


rule all:
    input:
        "plots/quals.svg"


def get_bwa_map_input_fastqs(wildcards):
    return config["samples"][wildcards.sample]


rule bwa_map:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        get_bwa_map_input_fastqs
    output:
        temp("mapped_reads/{sample}.bam")
    params:
        rg=r"@RG\tID:{sample}\tSM:{sample}"
    log:
        "logs/bwa_mem/{sample}.log"
    threads: 8
    shell:
        "(bwa mem -R '{params.rg}' -t {threads} {input} | "
        "samtools view -Sb - > {output}) 2> {log}"


rule samtools_sort:
    input:
        "mapped_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        protected("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam")
    shell:
        "samtools sort -T sorted_reads/{wildcards.sample} "
        "-O bam {input} > {output}"


rule samtools_index:
    input:
        "sorted_reads/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai"
    shell:
        "samtools index {input}"


rule bcftools_call:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam", sample=config["samples"]),
        bai=expand("sorted_reads/{sample}.bam.bai", sample=config["samples"])
    output:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    params:
        rate=config["prior_mutation_rate"]
    log:
        "logs/bcftools_call/all.log"
    shell:
        "(bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | "
        "bcftools call -mv -P {params.rate} - > {output}) 2> {log}"


rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "plots/quals.svg"
    script:
        "scripts/plot-quals.py"
```

Now, please go on with the [“additional features” part of the tutorial](additional_features).
