technology_and_tooling/snakemake/short.md, before:

---
name: "Short tutorial"
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
dependsOn: []
tags: [snakemake]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      Mölder, F., Jablonski, K.P., Letcher, B., Hall, M.B., Tomkins-Tinch,
      C.H., Sochat, V., Forster, J., Lee, S., Twardziok, S.O., Kanitz, A.,
      Wilm, A., Holtgrewe, M., Rahmann, S., Nahnsen, S., Köster, J., 2021.
      Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake. F1000Res 10, 33.
      Revision c7ae161c.
    url: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/short.html
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/snakemake/snakemake/main/snakemake/report/template/logo.svg
    license: MIT license
---

# Short tutorial

Here we provide a short tutorial that guides you through the main
features of Snakemake. Note that this is not suited to learn Snakemake
from scratch, rather to give a first impression. To really learn
Snakemake (starting from something simple, and extending towards
[label](../index.md)advanced features), use the main `tutorial`.

This document shows all steps performed in the official [Snakemake live
demo](https://youtu.be/hPrXcUUp70Y), such that it becomes possible to
follow them at your own pace. Solutions to each step can be found at the
bottom of this document.

The examples presented in this tutorial come from Bioinformatics.
However, Snakemake is a general-purpose workflow management system for
any discipline. For an explanation of the steps you will perform here,
have a look at `tutorial-background`. More
thorough explanations are provided in the full `tutorial`.

## Prerequisites

First, install Snakemake via Conda, as outlined in
`conda-install`. The minimal version of
Snakemake is sufficient for this demo.

Second, download and unpack the test data needed for this example from
[here](https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake-tutorial-data), e.g., via

```bash
mkdir snakemake-demo
cd snakemake-demo
wget https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake-tutorial-data/archive/v5.4.5.tar.gz
tar --wildcards -xf v5.4.5.tar.gz --strip 1 "*/data"
```

## Step 1

First, create an empty workflow in the current directory with:

```bash
mkdir workflow
touch workflow/Snakefile
```

Once a Snakefile is present, you can perform a dry run of Snakemake
with:

```bash
snakemake -n
```

Since the Snakefile is empty, it will report that nothing has to be
done. In the next steps, we will gradually fill the Snakefile with an
example analysis workflow.

## Step 2

The data folder in your working directory looks as follows:

```text
data
├── genome.fa
├── genome.fa.amb
├── genome.fa.ann
├── genome.fa.bwt
├── genome.fa.fai
├── genome.fa.pac
├── genome.fa.sa
└── samples
    ├── A.fastq
    ├── B.fastq
    └── C.fastq
```

You will create a workflow that maps the sequencing samples in the
`data/samples` folder to the reference genome `data/genome.fa`. Then,
you will call genomic variants over the mapped samples, and create an
example plot.

First, create a rule called `map_reads`, with input files

- `data/genome.fa`
- `data/samples/A.fastq`

and output file

- `results/mapped/A.bam`

To generate output from input, use the shell command

```shell
"bwa mem {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

Providing a shell command is not enough to run your workflow on an
unprepared system. For reproducibility, you also have to provide the
required software stack and define the desired version. This can be done
with the [Conda package manager](https://conda.io), which is directly
integrated with Snakemake: add a directive `conda: "envs/mapping.yaml"`
that points to a [Conda environment
definition](https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html?highlight=environment#creating-an-environment-file-manually),
with the following content

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - bwa =0.7.17
  - samtools =1.9
```

Upon execution, Snakemake will automatically create that environment,
and execute the shell command within.

Now, test your workflow by simulating the creation of the file
`results/mapped/A.bam` via

```bash
snakemake --use-conda -n results/mapped/A.bam
```

to perform a dry-run and

```bash
snakemake --use-conda results/mapped/A.bam --cores 1
```

to perform the actual execution.

## Step 3

Now, generalize the rule `map_reads` by replacing the concrete sample
name `A` with a wildcard `{sample}` in input and output file the rule
`map_reads`. This way, Snakemake can apply the rule to map any of the
three available samples to the reference genome.

Test this by creating the file `results/mapped/B.bam`.

## Step 4

Next, create a rule `sort_alignments` that sorts the obtained `.bam`
file by genomic coordinate. The rule should have the input file

- `results/mapped/{sample}.bam`

and the output file

- `results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam`

and uses the shell command

```bash
samtools sort -o {output} {input}
```

to perform the sorting. Moreover, use the same `conda:` directive as for
the previous rule.

Test your workflow with

```bash
snakemake --use-conda -n results/mapped/A.sorted.bam
```

and

```bash
snakemake --use-conda results/mapped/A.sorted.bam --cores 1
```

## Step 5

Now, we aggregate over all samples to perform a joint calling of genomic
variants. First, we define a variable

```python
samples = ["A", "B", "C"]
```

at the top of the `Snakefile`. This serves as a definition of the
samples over which we would want to aggregate. In real life, you would
want to use an external sample sheet or a [config
file](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/advanced.html#step-2-config-files)
for things like this.

For aggregation over many files, Snakemake provides the helper function
`expand` (see [the
docs](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/basics.html#step-5-calling-genomic-variants)).
Create a rule `call` with input files

- `fa="data/genome.fa"`
- `bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=samples)`

output file

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`

and shell command

```shell
bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}
```

Further, define a new conda environment file with the following content:

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - bcftools =1.9
```

## Step 6

Finally, we strive to calculate some exemplary statistics. This time, we
don't use a shell command, but rather employ Snakemake's ability to
integrate with scripting languages like R and Python, and Jupyter
notebooks.

First, we create a rule `plot_quals` with input file

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`

and output file

- `"results/plots/quals.svg"`.

Instead of a shell command, we use Snakemake\'s Jupyter notebook
integration by specifying

```yaml
notebook: "notebooks/plot-quals.py"
```

instead of using the `shell` directive as before.

Next, we have to define a conda environment for the rule, say
`workflow/envs/stats.yaml`, that provides the required Python packages
to execute the script:

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - pysam =0.17
  - altair =4.1
  - altair_saver =0.5
  - pandas =1.3
  - jupyter =1.0
```

Then, we let Snakemake generate a skeleton notebook for us with

```shell
snakemake --draft-notebook results/plots/quals.svg --cores 1 --use-conda
```

Snakemake will print instructions on how to open, edit and execute the
notebook.

We open the notebook in the editor and add the following content

```python
import pandas as pd
import altair as alt
from pysam import VariantFile
import snakemake

quals = pd.DataFrame({"qual": [record.qual for record in VariantFile(snakemake.input[0])]})

chart = alt.Chart(quals).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X("qual", bin=True),
    alt.Y("count()")
)

chart.save(snakemake.output[0])
```

As you can see, instead of writing a command line parser for passing
parameters like input and output files, you have direct access to the
properties of the rule via a magic `snakemake` object, that Snakemake
automatically inserts into the notebook before executing the rule.

Make sure to test your workflow with

```bash
snakemake --use-conda --force results/plots/quals.svg --cores 1
```

Here, the force ensures that the readily drafted notebook is re-executed
even if you had already generated the output plot in the interactive
mode.

## Step 7

So far, we have always specified a target file at the command line when
invoking Snakemake. When no target file is specified, Snakemake tries to
execute the first rule in the `Snakefile`. We can use this property to
define default target files.

At the top of your `Snakefile` define a rule `all`, with input files

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`
- `"results/plots/quals.svg"`

and neither a shell command nor output files. This rule simply serves as
an indicator of what shall be collected as results.

## Step 8

As a last step, we strive to annotate our workflow with some additional
information.

### Automatic reports

Snakemake can automatically create HTML reports with

```bash
snakemake --report report.html
```

Such a report contains runtime statistics, a visualization of the
workflow topology, used software and data provenance information.

In addition, you can mark any output file generated in your workflow for
inclusion into the report. It will be encoded directly into the report,
such that it can be, e.g., emailed as a self-contained document. The
reader (e.g., a collaborator of yours) can at any time download the
enclosed results from the report for further use, e.g., in a manuscript
you write together. In this example, please mark the output file
`"results/plots/quals.svg"` for inclusion by replacing it with
`report("results/plots/quals.svg", caption="report/calling.rst")` and
adding a file `report/calling.rst`, containing some description of the
output file. This description will be presented as caption in the
resulting report.

### Threads

The first rule `map_reads` can in theory use multiple threads. You can
make Snakemake aware of this, such that the information can be used for
scheduling. Add a directive `threads: 8` to the rule and alter the shell
command to

```bash
bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}
```

This passes the threads defined in the rule as a command line argument
to the `bwa` process.

### Temporary files

The output of the `map_reads` rule becomes superfluous once the sorted
version of the `.bam` file is generated by the rule `sort`. Snakemake
can automatically delete the superfluous output once it is not needed
anymore. For this, mark the output as temporary by replacing
`"results/mapped/{sample}.bam"` in the rule `bwa` with
`temp("results/mapped/{sample}.bam")`.

## Solutions

Only read this if you have a problem with one of the steps.

### Step 2

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/A.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/A.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 3

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 4

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule sort_alignments:
    input:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "samtools sort -o {output} {input}"
```

:::

### Step 5

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
samples = ["A", "B", "C"]

rule call_variants:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=SAMPLES)
    output:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    conda:
        "envs/calling.yaml"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 6

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
    conda:
        "envs/stats.yaml"
    notebook:
        "notebooks/plot-quals.py.ipynb"
```

:::

### Step 7

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule all:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf",
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
```

It has to appear as first rule in the `Snakefile`.

:::

### Step 8

:::solution

The complete workflow should look like this:

```snakemake
SAMPLES = ["A", "B", "C"]

rule all:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf",
        "results/plots/quals.svg"

rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"


rule sort_alignments:
    input:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "samtools sort -o {output} {input}"


rule call_variants:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=SAMPLES)
    output:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    conda:
        "envs/calling.yaml"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}"


rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
    conda:
        "envs/stats.yaml"
    notebook:
        "notebooks/plot-quals.py.ipynb"
```

:::

Commit message:

[Revamp] Workflows with Snakemake (#146)
* Update following Snakemake 8 official docs

* Mark codeblock as snakemake

* Remove mention of Atom editor

* Fix image not loading (basics, Step 5)

* Fix linting

* Remove snakemake import from code sample

* Annotate code sample as snakemake to avoid linting error

technology_and_tooling/snakemake/short.md, after:

---
name: "Short tutorial"
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
dependsOn: []
tags: [snakemake]
attribution:
  - citation: >
      Mölder, F., Jablonski, K.P., Letcher, B., Hall, M.B., Tomkins-Tinch,
      C.H., Sochat, V., Forster, J., Lee, S., Twardziok, S.O., Kanitz, A.,
      Wilm, A., Holtgrewe, M., Rahmann, S., Nahnsen, S., Köster, J., 2021.
      Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake. F1000Res 10, 33.
      Revision c7ae161c.
    url: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/short.html
    image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/snakemake/snakemake/main/snakemake/report/template/logo.svg
    license: MIT license
---

# Short tutorial

Here we provide a short tutorial that guides you through the main
features of Snakemake. Note that this is not suited to learn Snakemake
from scratch, rather to give a first impression. To really learn
Snakemake (starting from something simple, and extending towards
[label](../index.md)advanced features), use the main [tutorial](index).

This document shows all steps performed in the official [Snakemake live
demo](https://youtu.be/hPrXcUUp70Y), such that it becomes possible to
follow them at your own pace. Solutions to each step can be found at the
bottom of this document.

The examples presented in this tutorial come from Bioinformatics.
However, Snakemake is a general-purpose workflow management system for
any discipline. For an explanation of the steps you will perform here,
have a look at [tutorial-background](background). More
thorough explanations are provided in the full [tutorial](index).

## Prerequisites

First, install Snakemake via Conda, as outlined in
[`Installation via Conda/Mamba`](install). The minimal version of
Snakemake is sufficient for this demo.

Second, download and unpack the test data needed for this example from
[here](https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake-tutorial-data), e.g., via

```bash
mkdir snakemake-demo
cd snakemake-demo
wget https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake-tutorial-data/archive/v5.4.5.tar.gz
tar --wildcards -xf v5.4.5.tar.gz --strip 1 "*/data"
```

## Step 1

First, create an empty workflow in the current directory with:

```bash
mkdir workflow
touch workflow/Snakefile
```

Once a Snakefile is present, you can perform a dry run of Snakemake
with:

```bash
snakemake -n
```

Since the Snakefile is empty, it will report that nothing has to be
done. In the next steps, we will gradually fill the Snakefile with an
example analysis workflow.

## Step 2

The data folder in your working directory looks as follows:

```text
data
├── genome.fa
├── genome.fa.amb
├── genome.fa.ann
├── genome.fa.bwt
├── genome.fa.fai
├── genome.fa.pac
├── genome.fa.sa
└── samples
    ├── A.fastq
    ├── B.fastq
    └── C.fastq
```

You will create a workflow that maps the sequencing samples in the
`data/samples` folder to the reference genome `data/genome.fa`. Then,
you will call genomic variants over the mapped samples, and create an
example plot.

First, create a rule called `map_reads`, with input files

- `data/genome.fa`
- `data/samples/A.fastq`

and output file

- `results/mapped/A.bam`

To generate output from input, use the shell command

```shell
"bwa mem {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}"
```

Providing a shell command is not enough to run your workflow on an
unprepared system. For reproducibility, you also have to provide the
required software stack and define the desired version. This can be done
with the [Conda package manager](https://conda.io), which is directly
integrated with Snakemake: add a directive `conda: "envs/mapping.yaml"`
that points to a [Conda environment
definition](https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html?highlight=environment#creating-an-environment-file-manually),
with the following content

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - bwa =0.7.17
  - samtools =1.9
```

Upon execution, Snakemake will automatically create that environment,
and execute the shell command within.

Now, test your workflow by simulating the creation of the file
`results/mapped/A.bam` via

```bash
snakemake --software-deployment-method conda -n results/mapped/A.bam
```

to perform a dry-run and

```bash
snakemake --software-deployment-method conda results/mapped/A.bam --cores 1
```

to perform the actual execution.

:::callout

The `--software-deployment-method` option has a shorthand alias `--sdm`, which we will use for brevity in the rest of this tutorial. There are two other long-form aliases `--deployment-method` and `--deployment`.

:::

## Step 3

Now, generalize the rule `map_reads` by replacing the concrete sample
name `A` with a wildcard `{sample}` in input and output file the rule
`map_reads`. This way, Snakemake can apply the rule to map any of the
three available samples to the reference genome.

Test this by creating the file `results/mapped/B.bam`.

## Step 4

Next, create a rule `sort_alignments` that sorts the obtained `.bam`
file by genomic coordinate. The rule should have the input file

- `results/mapped/{sample}.bam`

and the output file

- `results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam`

and uses the shell command

```bash
samtools sort -o {output} {input}
```

to perform the sorting. Moreover, use the same `conda:` directive as for
the previous rule.

Test your workflow with

```bash
snakemake --use-conda -n results/mapped/A.sorted.bam
```

and

```bash
snakemake --use-conda results/mapped/A.sorted.bam --cores 1
```

## Step 5

Now, we aggregate over all samples to perform a joint calling of genomic
variants. First, we define a variable

```python
samples = ["A", "B", "C"]
```

at the top of the `Snakefile`. This serves as a definition of the
samples over which we would want to aggregate. In real life, you would
want to use an external sample sheet or a [config
file](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/advanced.html#step-2-config-files)
for things like this.

For aggregation over many files, Snakemake provides the helper function
`expand` (see [the
docs](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/basics.html#step-5-calling-genomic-variants)).
Create a rule `call` with input files

- `fa="data/genome.fa"`
- `bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=samples)`

output file

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`

and shell command

```shell
bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}
```

Further, define a new conda environment file with the following content:

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - bcftools =1.9
```

## Step 6

Finally, we strive to calculate some exemplary statistics. This time, we
don't use a shell command, but rather employ Snakemake's ability to
integrate with scripting languages like R and Python, and Jupyter
notebooks.

First, we create a rule `plot_quals` with input file

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`

and output file

- `"results/plots/quals.svg"`.

Instead of a shell command, we use Snakemake\'s Jupyter notebook
integration by specifying

```snakemake
notebook:
    "notebooks/plot-quals.py/ipynb"
```

instead of using the `shell` directive as before.

Next, we have to define a conda environment for the rule, say
`workflow/envs/stats.yaml`, that provides the required Python packages
to execute the script:

```yaml
channels:
  - bioconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - pysam =0.17
  - altair =4.1
  - altair_saver =0.5
  - pandas =1.3
  - jupyter =1.0
```

Then, we let Snakemake generate a skeleton notebook for us with

```shell
snakemake --draft-notebook results/plots/quals.svg --cores 1 --sdm conda
```

Snakemake will print instructions on how to open, edit and execute the
notebook.

We open the notebook in the editor and add the following content

```snakemake
import pandas as pd
import altair as alt
from pysam import VariantFile

quals = pd.DataFrame({"qual": [record.qual for record in VariantFile(snakemake.input[0])]})

chart = alt.Chart(quals).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X("qual", bin=True),
    alt.Y("count()")
)

chart.save(snakemake.output[0])
```

As you can see, instead of writing a command line parser for passing
parameters like input and output files, you have direct access to the
properties of the rule via a magic `snakemake` object, that Snakemake
automatically inserts into the notebook before executing the rule.

Make sure to test your workflow with

```bash
snakemake --sdm conda --force results/plots/quals.svg --cores 1
```

Here, the force ensures that the readily drafted notebook is re-executed
even if you had already generated the output plot in the interactive
mode.

## Step 7

So far, we have always specified a target file at the command line when
invoking Snakemake. When no target file is specified, Snakemake tries to
execute the first rule in the `Snakefile`. We can use this property to
define default target files.

At the top of your `Snakefile` define a rule `all`, with input files

- `"results/calls/all.vcf"`
- `"results/plots/quals.svg"`

and neither a shell command nor output files. This rule simply serves as
an indicator of what shall be collected as results.

## Step 8

As a last step, we strive to annotate our workflow with some additional
information.

### Automatic reports

Snakemake can automatically create HTML reports with

```bash
snakemake --report report.html
```

Such a report contains runtime statistics, a visualization of the
workflow topology, used software and data provenance information.

In addition, you can mark any output file generated in your workflow for
inclusion into the report. It will be encoded directly into the report,
such that it can be, e.g., emailed as a self-contained document. The
reader (e.g., a collaborator of yours) can at any time download the
enclosed results from the report for further use, e.g., in a manuscript
you write together. In this example, please mark the output file
`"results/plots/quals.svg"` for inclusion by replacing it with
`report("results/plots/quals.svg", caption="report/calling.rst")` and
adding a file `report/calling.rst`, containing some description of the
output file. This description will be presented as caption in the
resulting report.

### Threads

The first rule `map_reads` can in theory use multiple threads. You can
make Snakemake aware of this, such that the information can be used for
scheduling. Add a directive `threads: 8` to the rule and alter the shell
command to

```bash
bwa mem -t {threads} {input} | samtools view -Sb - > {output}
```

This passes the threads defined in the rule as a command line argument
to the `bwa` process.

### Temporary files

The output of the `map_reads` rule becomes superfluous once the sorted
version of the `.bam` file is generated by the rule `sort`. Snakemake
can automatically delete the superfluous output once it is not needed
anymore. For this, mark the output as temporary by replacing
`"results/mapped/{sample}.bam"` in the rule `bwa` with
`temp("results/mapped/{sample}.bam")`.

## Solutions

Only read this if you have a problem with one of the steps.

### Step 2

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/A.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/A.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 3

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 4

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule sort_alignments:
    input:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "samtools sort -o {output} {input}"
```

:::

### Step 5

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
samples = ["A", "B", "C"]

rule call_variants:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=SAMPLES)
    output:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    conda:
        "envs/calling.yaml"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}"
```

:::

### Step 6

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
    conda:
        "envs/stats.yaml"
    notebook:
        "notebooks/plot-quals.py.ipynb"
```

:::

### Step 7

:::solution

The rule should look like this:

```snakemake
rule all:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf",
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
```

It has to appear as first rule in the `Snakefile`.

:::

### Step 8

:::solution

The complete workflow should look like this:

```snakemake
SAMPLES = ["A", "B", "C"]

rule all:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf",
        "results/plots/quals.svg"

rule map_reads:
    input:
        "data/genome.fa",
        "data/samples/{sample}.fastq"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "bwa mem {input} | samtools view -b - > {output}"


rule sort_alignments:
    input:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.bam"
    output:
        "results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam"
    conda:
        "envs/mapping.yaml"
    shell:
        "samtools sort -o {output} {input}"


rule call_variants:
    input:
        fa="data/genome.fa",
        bam=expand("results/mapped/{sample}.sorted.bam", sample=SAMPLES)
    output:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    conda:
        "envs/calling.yaml"
    shell:
        "bcftools mpileup -f {input.fa} {input.bam} | bcftools call -mv - > {output}"


rule plot_quals:
    input:
        "results/calls/all.vcf"
    output:
        "results/plots/quals.svg"
    conda:
        "envs/stats.yaml"
    notebook:
        "notebooks/plot-quals.py.ipynb"
```

:::
