high_performance_computing/hpc_mpi/03_communicating_data.md, before:

---
name: Communicating Data in MPI
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_mpi.02_mpi_api
]
tags: []
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to the Message Passing Interface" course by the Southampton RSG
      url: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/dirac-intro-to-mpi/
      image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/dirac-intro-to-mpi/assets/img/home-logo.png
      license: CC-BY-4.0
---

In previous episodes we've seen that when we run an MPI application, multiple *independent* processes are created which do their own work, on their own data, in their own private memory space. 
At some point in our program, one rank will probably need to know about the data another rank has, such as when combining a problem back together which was split across ranks. 
Since each rank's data is private to itself, we can't just access another rank's memory and get what we need from there. 
We have to instead explicitly *communicate* data between ranks. Sending and receiving data between ranks form some of the most basic building blocks in any MPI application, and the success of your parallelisation often relies on how you communicate data.


## Communicating data using messages

MPI is a standardised framework for passing data and other messages between independently running processes.
If we want to share or access data from one rank to another, we use the MPI API to transfer data in a "message."
To put it simply, a message is merely a data structure which contains the data, and is usually expressed as a collection of data elements of a particular data type.

Sending and receiving data happens in one of two ways.
We either want to send data from one specific rank to another, known as point-to-point communication, or to/from multiple ranks all at once to a single target, known as collective communication.
In both cases, we have to *explicitly* "send" something and to *explicitly* "receive" something.
We've emphasised *explicitly* here to make clear that data communication can't happen by itself.
That is a rank can't just "pluck" data from one rank, because a rank doesn't automatically send and receive the data it needs.
If we don't program in data communication, data can't be shared.
None of this communication happens for free, either.
With every message sent, there is an associated overhead which impacts the performance of your program.
Often we won't notice this overhead, as it is quite small.
But if we communicate large amounts data or too often, those small overheads can rapidly add up into a noticeable performance hit.

::::callout
## Common mistakes

A common mistake for new MPI users is to write code using point-to-point communication which emulates what the collective communication functions are designed to do. 
This is an inefficient way to share data. 
The collective routines in MPI have multiple tricks and optimizations up their sleeves, resulting in communication overheads much lower than the equivalent point-to-point approach.
One other advantage is that collective communication often requires less code to achieve the same thing, which is always a win.
It is there almost always better to use collective operations where you can.
::::

To get an idea of how communication typically happens, imagine we have two ranks: rank A and rank B.
If rank A wants to send data to rank B (e.g., point-to-point), it must first call the appropriate MPI send function which puts that data into an internal *buffer*; sometimes known as the send buffer or envelope.
Once the data is in the buffer, MPI figures out how to route the message to rank B (usually over a network) and sends it to B.
To receive the data, rank B must call a data receiving function which will listen for any messages being sent.
When the message has been successfully routed and the data transfer complete, rank B sends an acknowledgement back to rank A to say that the transfer has finished, similarly to how read receipts work in e-mails and instant messages.

:::::challenge{id=check-understanding, title="Check Your Understanding"}
In an imaginary simulation, each rank is responsible for calculating the physical properties for a subset of cells on a larger simulation grid. 
Another calculation, however, needs to know the average of, for example, the temperature for the subset of cells for each rank. What approaches could you use to share this data?

::::solution
There are multiple ways to approach this situation, but the most efficient approach would be to use collective operations to send the average temperature to a root rank (or all ranks) to perform the final calculation.
You can, of course, also use a point-to-point pattern, but it would be less efficient.
::::
:::::


### Communication modes

There are multiple "modes" on how data is sent in MPI: standard, buffered, synchronous and ready.
When an MPI communication function is called, control/execution of the program is passed from the calling program to the MPI function.
Your program won't continue until MPI is happy that the communication happened successfully.
The difference between the communication modes is the criteria of a successful communication.

To use the different modes, we don't pass a special flag.
Instead, MPI uses different functions to separate the different modes.
The table below lists the four modes with a description and their associated functions (which will be covered in detail in the following episodes).

| Mode | Description | MPI Function |
| - | - | - |
| Synchronous | Returns control to the program when the message has been sent and received successfully | `MPI_Ssend()` |
| Buffered | Control is returned when the data has been copied into in the send buffer, regardless of the receive being completed or not | `MPI_Bsend()` |
| Standard  | Either buffered or synchronous, depending on the size of the data being sent and what your specific MPI implementation chooses to use | `MPI_Send()` |
| Ready | Will only return control if the receiving rank is already listening for a message | `MPI_Rsend()` |

In contrast to the four modes for sending data, receiving data only has one mode and therefore only a single function.

| Mode |  Description | MPI Function |
| - | - | - |
| Receive | Returns control when data has been received successfully | `MPI_Recv()` |


### Blocking vs. non-blocking communication

Communication can also be done in two additional ways: blocking and non-blocking.
In blocking mode, communication functions will only return once the send buffer is ready to be re-used, meaning that the message has been both sent and received.
In terms of a blocking synchronous send, control will not be passed back to the program until the message sent by rank A has reached rank B, and rank B has sent an acknowledgement back. 
If rank B is never listening for messages, rank A will become *deadlocked*.
A deadlock happens when your program hangs indefinitely because the send (or receive) is unable to complete.
Deadlocks occur for a countless number of reasons.
For example, we may forget to write the corresponding receive function when sending data. 
Alternatively, a function may return earlier due to an error which isn't handled properly, or a while condition may never be met creating an infinite loop.
Furthermore, ranks can sometimes crash silently making communication with them impossible, but this doesn't stop any attempts to send data to crashed rank.

::::callout
## Avoiding communication deadlocks
A common piece of advice in C is that when allocating memory using `malloc()`, always write the accompanying call to `free()` to help avoid memory leaks by forgetting to deallocate the memory later.
You can apply the same mantra to communication in MPI. When you send data, always write the code to receive the data as you may forget to later and accidentally cause a deadlock.
::::

Blocking communication works best when the work is balanced across ranks, so that each rank has an equal amount of things to do. 
A common pattern in scientific computing is to split a calculation across a grid and then to share the results between all ranks before moving onto the next calculation.
If the workload is well balanced, each rank will finish at roughly the same time and be ready to transfer data at the same time.
But, as shown in the diagram below, if the workload is unbalanced, some ranks will finish their calculations earlier and begin to send their data to the other ranks before they are ready to receive data. 
This means some ranks will be sitting around doing nothing whilst they wait for the other ranks to become ready to receive data, wasting computation time.

![Blocking communication](fig/blocking-wait.png)

If most of the ranks are waiting around, or one rank is very heavily loaded in comparison, this could massively impact the performance of your program.
Instead of doing calculations, a rank will be waiting for other ranks to complete their work.

Non-blocking communication hands back control, immediately, before the communication has finished. 
Instead of your program being *blocked* by communication, ranks will immediately go back to the heavy work and instead periodically check if there is data to receive (which you must remember to program) instead of waiting around. 
The advantage of this communication pattern is illustrated in the diagram below, where less time is spent communicating.

![Non-blocking communication](fig/non-blocking-wait.png)

This is a common pattern where communication and calculations are interwoven with one another, decreasing the amount of "dead time" where ranks are waiting for other ranks to communicate data. 
Unfortunately, non-blocking communication is often more difficult to successfully implement and isn't appropriate for every algorithm.
In most cases, blocking communication is usually easier to implement and to conceptually understand, and is somewhat "safer" in the sense that the program cannot continue if data is missing.
However, the potential performance improvements of overlapping communication and calculation is often worth the more difficult implementation and harder to read/more complex code.

::::callout
## Should I use blocking or non-blocking communication?
When you are first implementing communication into your program, it's advisable to first use blocking synchronous sends to start with, as this is arguably the easiest to use pattern.
Once you are happy that the correct data is being communicated successfully, but you are unhappy with performance, then it would be time to start experimenting with the different communication modes and blocking vs. non-blocking patterns to balance performance with ease of use and code readability and maintainability.
::::

:::::challenge{id=communication-in-everyday-life, title="MPI Communication in Everyday Life?"}
We communicate with people non-stop in everyday life, whether we want to or not!
Think of some examples/analogies of blocking and non-blocking communication we use to talk to other people.

::::solution
Probably the most common example of blocking communication in everyday life would be having a conversation or a phone call with someone.
The conversation can't happen and data can't be communicated until the other person responds or picks up the phone.
Until the other person responds, we are stuck waiting for the response.

Sending e-mails or letters in the post is a form of non-blocking communication we're all familiar with.
When we send an e-mail, or a letter, we don't wait around to hear back for a response.
We instead go back to our lives and start doing tasks instead.
We can periodically check our e-mail for the response, and either keep doing other tasks or continue our previous task once we've received a response back from our e-mail.
::::
:::::


## Communicators

Communication in MPI happens in something known as a *communicator*.
We can think of a communicator as fundamentally being a collection of ranks which are able to exchange data with one another.
What this means is that every communication between two (or more) ranks is linked to a specific communicator in the program.
When we run an MPI application, the ranks will belong to the default communicator known as `MPI_COMM_WORLD`. 
We've seen this in earlier episodes when, for example, we've used functions like `MPI_Comm_rank()` to get the rank number,

```c
int my_rank;
MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &my_rank);  /* MPI_COMM_WORLD is the communicator the rank belongs to */
```

In addition to `MPI_COMM_WORLD`, we can make sub-communicators and distribute ranks into them.
Messages can only be sent and received to and from the same communicator, effectively isolating messages to a communicator.
For most applications, we usually don't need anything other than `MPI_COMM_WORLD`.
But organising ranks into communicators can be helpful in some circumstances, as you can create small "work units" of multiple ranks to dynamically schedule the workload, or to help compartmentalise the problem into smaller chunks by using a [virtual cartesian topology](https://www.mpi-forum.org/docs/mpi-3.1/mpi31-report/node192.htm#Node192). 
Throughout this lesson, we will stick to using `MPI_COMM_WORLD`.


## Basic MPI data types

To send a message, we need to know the size of it. 
The size is not the number of bytes of data that is being sent but is instead expressed as the number of elements of a particular data type you want to send.
So when we send a message, we have to tell MPI how many elements of "something" we are sending and what type of data it is.
If we don't do this correctly, we'll either end up telling MPI to send only *some* of the data or try to send more data than we want!
For example, if we were sending an array and we specify too few elements, then only a subset of the array will be sent or received.
But if we specify too many elements, than we are likely to end up with either a segmentation fault or some undefined behaviour!
If we don't specify the correct data type, then bad things will happen under the hood when it comes to communicating.

There are two types of data type in MPI: basic MPI data types and derived data types.
The basic data types are in essence the same data types we would use in C (or Fortran), such as `int`, `float`, `bool` and so on.
When defining the data type of the elements being sent, we don't use the primitive C types.
MPI instead uses a set of compile-time constants which internally represents the data types.
These data types are in the table below:

| MPI basic data type | C equivalent |
| - | - |
| MPI_SHORT | short int |
| MPI_INT | int |
| MPI_LONG | long int |
| MPI_LONG_LONG | long long int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_CHAR | unsigned char |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_SHORT |unsigned short int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED | unsigned int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG | unsigned long int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG_LONG | unsigned long long int |
| MPI_FLOAT | float |
| MPI_DOUBLE | double |
| MPI_LONG_DOUBLE | long double |
| MPI_BYTE | char |

These constants don't expand out to actual date types, so we can't use them in variable declarations, e.g.,

```c
MPI_INT my_int;
```

is not valid code because under the hood, these constants are actually special structs used internally. 
Therefore we can only uses these expressions as arguments in MPI functions.

::::callout
## Don't forget to update your types
At some point during development, you might change an `int` to a `long` or a `float` to a `double`, or something to something else.
Once you've gone through your codebase and updated the types for, e.g., variable declarations and function signatures, you must also do the same for MPI functions.
If you don't, you'll end up running into communication errors.
It may be helpful to define compile-time constants for the data types and use those instead. If you ever do need to change the type, you would only have to do it in one place.

```c
/* define constants for your data types */
#define AGE_MPI_TYPE MPI_INT
#define AGE_TYPE int
/* use them as you would normally */
AGE_TYPE my_age = 25;
```
::::

Derived data types are data structures which you define, built using the basic MPI data types.
These derived types are analogous to defining structures or type definitions in C.
They're most often helpful to group together similar data to send/receive multiple things in a single communication, or when you need to communicate non-contiguous data such as "vectors" or sub-sets of an array.
This will be covered in the **Advanced Communication Techniques** episode.

:::::challenge{id=what-type, title="What Type Should You Use?"}
For the following pieces of data, what MPI data types should you use?

1. `a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};`
2. `a[] = {1.0, -2.5, 3.1456, 4591.223, 1e-10};`
3. `a[] = "Hello, world!";`

::::solution
1. `MPI_INT`
2. `MPI_DOUBLE` - `MPI_FLOAT` would not be correct as `float`'s contain 32 bits of data whereas `double`s are 64 bit.
3. `MPI_BYTE` or `MPI_CHAR` - you may want to use [strlen](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/strlen.3.html) to calculate how many elements of `MPI_CHAR` being sent
::::
:::::

Commit message:

Fixes #82 - add MPI learning objectives

high_performance_computing/hpc_mpi/03_communicating_data.md, after:

---
name: Communicating Data in MPI
dependsOn: [
  high_performance_computing.hpc_mpi.02_mpi_api
]
tags: []
attribution: 
    - citation: >
        "Introduction to the Message Passing Interface" course by the Southampton RSG
      url: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/dirac-intro-to-mpi/
      image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/dirac-intro-to-mpi/assets/img/home-logo.png
      license: CC-BY-4.0
learningOutcomes:
  - Understand how data is exchanged between MPI ranks.
  - Briefly describe the modes of communication within an MPI program.
  - Differentiate between blocking and non-blocking communication.
  - Use an MPI communicator within a program.
  - List the basic MPI data types.
---

In previous episodes we've seen that when we run an MPI application, multiple *independent* processes are created which do their own work, on their own data, in their own private memory space. 
At some point in our program, one rank will probably need to know about the data another rank has, such as when combining a problem back together which was split across ranks. 
Since each rank's data is private to itself, we can't just access another rank's memory and get what we need from there. 
We have to instead explicitly *communicate* data between ranks. Sending and receiving data between ranks form some of the most basic building blocks in any MPI application, and the success of your parallelisation often relies on how you communicate data.


## Communicating data using messages

MPI is a standardised framework for passing data and other messages between independently running processes.
If we want to share or access data from one rank to another, we use the MPI API to transfer data in a "message."
To put it simply, a message is merely a data structure which contains the data, and is usually expressed as a collection of data elements of a particular data type.

Sending and receiving data happens in one of two ways.
We either want to send data from one specific rank to another, known as point-to-point communication, or to/from multiple ranks all at once to a single target, known as collective communication.
In both cases, we have to *explicitly* "send" something and to *explicitly* "receive" something.
We've emphasised *explicitly* here to make clear that data communication can't happen by itself.
That is a rank can't just "pluck" data from one rank, because a rank doesn't automatically send and receive the data it needs.
If we don't program in data communication, data can't be shared.
None of this communication happens for free, either.
With every message sent, there is an associated overhead which impacts the performance of your program.
Often we won't notice this overhead, as it is quite small.
But if we communicate large amounts data or too often, those small overheads can rapidly add up into a noticeable performance hit.

::::callout
## Common mistakes

A common mistake for new MPI users is to write code using point-to-point communication which emulates what the collective communication functions are designed to do. 
This is an inefficient way to share data. 
The collective routines in MPI have multiple tricks and optimizations up their sleeves, resulting in communication overheads much lower than the equivalent point-to-point approach.
One other advantage is that collective communication often requires less code to achieve the same thing, which is always a win.
It is there almost always better to use collective operations where you can.
::::

To get an idea of how communication typically happens, imagine we have two ranks: rank A and rank B.
If rank A wants to send data to rank B (e.g., point-to-point), it must first call the appropriate MPI send function which puts that data into an internal *buffer*; sometimes known as the send buffer or envelope.
Once the data is in the buffer, MPI figures out how to route the message to rank B (usually over a network) and sends it to B.
To receive the data, rank B must call a data receiving function which will listen for any messages being sent.
When the message has been successfully routed and the data transfer complete, rank B sends an acknowledgement back to rank A to say that the transfer has finished, similarly to how read receipts work in e-mails and instant messages.

:::::challenge{id=check-understanding, title="Check Your Understanding"}
In an imaginary simulation, each rank is responsible for calculating the physical properties for a subset of cells on a larger simulation grid. 
Another calculation, however, needs to know the average of, for example, the temperature for the subset of cells for each rank. What approaches could you use to share this data?

::::solution
There are multiple ways to approach this situation, but the most efficient approach would be to use collective operations to send the average temperature to a root rank (or all ranks) to perform the final calculation.
You can, of course, also use a point-to-point pattern, but it would be less efficient.
::::
:::::


### Communication modes

There are multiple "modes" on how data is sent in MPI: standard, buffered, synchronous and ready.
When an MPI communication function is called, control/execution of the program is passed from the calling program to the MPI function.
Your program won't continue until MPI is happy that the communication happened successfully.
The difference between the communication modes is the criteria of a successful communication.

To use the different modes, we don't pass a special flag.
Instead, MPI uses different functions to separate the different modes.
The table below lists the four modes with a description and their associated functions (which will be covered in detail in the following episodes).

| Mode | Description | MPI Function |
| - | - | - |
| Synchronous | Returns control to the program when the message has been sent and received successfully | `MPI_Ssend()` |
| Buffered | Control is returned when the data has been copied into in the send buffer, regardless of the receive being completed or not | `MPI_Bsend()` |
| Standard  | Either buffered or synchronous, depending on the size of the data being sent and what your specific MPI implementation chooses to use | `MPI_Send()` |
| Ready | Will only return control if the receiving rank is already listening for a message | `MPI_Rsend()` |

In contrast to the four modes for sending data, receiving data only has one mode and therefore only a single function.

| Mode |  Description | MPI Function |
| - | - | - |
| Receive | Returns control when data has been received successfully | `MPI_Recv()` |


### Blocking vs. non-blocking communication

Communication can also be done in two additional ways: blocking and non-blocking.
In blocking mode, communication functions will only return once the send buffer is ready to be re-used, meaning that the message has been both sent and received.
In terms of a blocking synchronous send, control will not be passed back to the program until the message sent by rank A has reached rank B, and rank B has sent an acknowledgement back. 
If rank B is never listening for messages, rank A will become *deadlocked*.
A deadlock happens when your program hangs indefinitely because the send (or receive) is unable to complete.
Deadlocks occur for a countless number of reasons.
For example, we may forget to write the corresponding receive function when sending data. 
Alternatively, a function may return earlier due to an error which isn't handled properly, or a while condition may never be met creating an infinite loop.
Furthermore, ranks can sometimes crash silently making communication with them impossible, but this doesn't stop any attempts to send data to crashed rank.

::::callout
## Avoiding communication deadlocks
A common piece of advice in C is that when allocating memory using `malloc()`, always write the accompanying call to `free()` to help avoid memory leaks by forgetting to deallocate the memory later.
You can apply the same mantra to communication in MPI. When you send data, always write the code to receive the data as you may forget to later and accidentally cause a deadlock.
::::

Blocking communication works best when the work is balanced across ranks, so that each rank has an equal amount of things to do. 
A common pattern in scientific computing is to split a calculation across a grid and then to share the results between all ranks before moving onto the next calculation.
If the workload is well balanced, each rank will finish at roughly the same time and be ready to transfer data at the same time.
But, as shown in the diagram below, if the workload is unbalanced, some ranks will finish their calculations earlier and begin to send their data to the other ranks before they are ready to receive data. 
This means some ranks will be sitting around doing nothing whilst they wait for the other ranks to become ready to receive data, wasting computation time.

![Blocking communication](fig/blocking-wait.png)

If most of the ranks are waiting around, or one rank is very heavily loaded in comparison, this could massively impact the performance of your program.
Instead of doing calculations, a rank will be waiting for other ranks to complete their work.

Non-blocking communication hands back control, immediately, before the communication has finished. 
Instead of your program being *blocked* by communication, ranks will immediately go back to the heavy work and instead periodically check if there is data to receive (which you must remember to program) instead of waiting around. 
The advantage of this communication pattern is illustrated in the diagram below, where less time is spent communicating.

![Non-blocking communication](fig/non-blocking-wait.png)

This is a common pattern where communication and calculations are interwoven with one another, decreasing the amount of "dead time" where ranks are waiting for other ranks to communicate data. 
Unfortunately, non-blocking communication is often more difficult to successfully implement and isn't appropriate for every algorithm.
In most cases, blocking communication is usually easier to implement and to conceptually understand, and is somewhat "safer" in the sense that the program cannot continue if data is missing.
However, the potential performance improvements of overlapping communication and calculation is often worth the more difficult implementation and harder to read/more complex code.

::::callout
## Should I use blocking or non-blocking communication?
When you are first implementing communication into your program, it's advisable to first use blocking synchronous sends to start with, as this is arguably the easiest to use pattern.
Once you are happy that the correct data is being communicated successfully, but you are unhappy with performance, then it would be time to start experimenting with the different communication modes and blocking vs. non-blocking patterns to balance performance with ease of use and code readability and maintainability.
::::

:::::challenge{id=communication-in-everyday-life, title="MPI Communication in Everyday Life?"}
We communicate with people non-stop in everyday life, whether we want to or not!
Think of some examples/analogies of blocking and non-blocking communication we use to talk to other people.

::::solution
Probably the most common example of blocking communication in everyday life would be having a conversation or a phone call with someone.
The conversation can't happen and data can't be communicated until the other person responds or picks up the phone.
Until the other person responds, we are stuck waiting for the response.

Sending e-mails or letters in the post is a form of non-blocking communication we're all familiar with.
When we send an e-mail, or a letter, we don't wait around to hear back for a response.
We instead go back to our lives and start doing tasks instead.
We can periodically check our e-mail for the response, and either keep doing other tasks or continue our previous task once we've received a response back from our e-mail.
::::
:::::


## Communicators

Communication in MPI happens in something known as a *communicator*.
We can think of a communicator as fundamentally being a collection of ranks which are able to exchange data with one another.
What this means is that every communication between two (or more) ranks is linked to a specific communicator in the program.
When we run an MPI application, the ranks will belong to the default communicator known as `MPI_COMM_WORLD`. 
We've seen this in earlier episodes when, for example, we've used functions like `MPI_Comm_rank()` to get the rank number,

```c
int my_rank;
MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &my_rank);  /* MPI_COMM_WORLD is the communicator the rank belongs to */
```

In addition to `MPI_COMM_WORLD`, we can make sub-communicators and distribute ranks into them.
Messages can only be sent and received to and from the same communicator, effectively isolating messages to a communicator.
For most applications, we usually don't need anything other than `MPI_COMM_WORLD`.
But organising ranks into communicators can be helpful in some circumstances, as you can create small "work units" of multiple ranks to dynamically schedule the workload, or to help compartmentalise the problem into smaller chunks by using a [virtual cartesian topology](https://www.mpi-forum.org/docs/mpi-3.1/mpi31-report/node192.htm#Node192). 
Throughout this lesson, we will stick to using `MPI_COMM_WORLD`.


## Basic MPI data types

To send a message, we need to know the size of it. 
The size is not the number of bytes of data that is being sent but is instead expressed as the number of elements of a particular data type you want to send.
So when we send a message, we have to tell MPI how many elements of "something" we are sending and what type of data it is.
If we don't do this correctly, we'll either end up telling MPI to send only *some* of the data or try to send more data than we want!
For example, if we were sending an array and we specify too few elements, then only a subset of the array will be sent or received.
But if we specify too many elements, than we are likely to end up with either a segmentation fault or some undefined behaviour!
If we don't specify the correct data type, then bad things will happen under the hood when it comes to communicating.

There are two types of data type in MPI: basic MPI data types and derived data types.
The basic data types are in essence the same data types we would use in C (or Fortran), such as `int`, `float`, `bool` and so on.
When defining the data type of the elements being sent, we don't use the primitive C types.
MPI instead uses a set of compile-time constants which internally represents the data types.
These data types are in the table below:

| MPI basic data type | C equivalent |
| - | - |
| MPI_SHORT | short int |
| MPI_INT | int |
| MPI_LONG | long int |
| MPI_LONG_LONG | long long int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_CHAR | unsigned char |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_SHORT |unsigned short int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED | unsigned int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG | unsigned long int |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG_LONG | unsigned long long int |
| MPI_FLOAT | float |
| MPI_DOUBLE | double |
| MPI_LONG_DOUBLE | long double |
| MPI_BYTE | char |

These constants don't expand out to actual date types, so we can't use them in variable declarations, e.g.,

```c
MPI_INT my_int;
```

is not valid code because under the hood, these constants are actually special structs used internally. 
Therefore we can only uses these expressions as arguments in MPI functions.

::::callout
## Don't forget to update your types
At some point during development, you might change an `int` to a `long` or a `float` to a `double`, or something to something else.
Once you've gone through your codebase and updated the types for, e.g., variable declarations and function signatures, you must also do the same for MPI functions.
If you don't, you'll end up running into communication errors.
It may be helpful to define compile-time constants for the data types and use those instead. If you ever do need to change the type, you would only have to do it in one place.

```c
/* define constants for your data types */
#define AGE_MPI_TYPE MPI_INT
#define AGE_TYPE int
/* use them as you would normally */
AGE_TYPE my_age = 25;
```
::::

Derived data types are data structures which you define, built using the basic MPI data types.
These derived types are analogous to defining structures or type definitions in C.
They're most often helpful to group together similar data to send/receive multiple things in a single communication, or when you need to communicate non-contiguous data such as "vectors" or sub-sets of an array.
This will be covered in the **Advanced Communication Techniques** episode.

:::::challenge{id=what-type, title="What Type Should You Use?"}
For the following pieces of data, what MPI data types should you use?

1. `a[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};`
2. `a[] = {1.0, -2.5, 3.1456, 4591.223, 1e-10};`
3. `a[] = "Hello, world!";`

::::solution
1. `MPI_INT`
2. `MPI_DOUBLE` - `MPI_FLOAT` would not be correct as `float`'s contain 32 bits of data whereas `double`s are 64 bit.
3. `MPI_BYTE` or `MPI_CHAR` - you may want to use [strlen](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/strlen.3.html) to calculate how many elements of `MPI_CHAR` being sent
::::
:::::
