software_architecture_and_design/procedural/index.md, before:

---
id: procedural
name: Procedural Programming
files:
  [
    [variables_cpp.md, functions_cpp.md, containers_cpp.md],
    [variables_python.md, containers_python.md, functions_python.md, arrays_python.md],
  ]
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.ide]
summary: |
  Procedural Programming is based around the idea that code should be structured
  into a sequence of **procedures** that operate on data. This course will
  introduce you to the basics of procedural programming in either Python or C++.
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from the "Software Engineering" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## The Procedural Paradigm

Procedural Programming is based around the idea that code should be structured
into a sequence of **procedures** that operate on data. Each procedure
(optionally) takes some input, performs some computation and (optionally)
returns some output. We can then use these procedures to perform computation,
without having to be concerned with exactly how the computation is performed.

You may wish to think of the Procedural Paradigm as focussing on the **verbs**
of a computation.

Commit message:

fix: adds course-level learning outcomes for Python procedural programming

software_architecture_and_design/procedural/index.md, after:

---
id: procedural
name: Procedural Programming
files:
  [
    [variables_cpp.md, functions_cpp.md, containers_cpp.md],
    [variables_python.md, containers_python.md, functions_python.md, arrays_python.md],
  ]
learningOutcomes:
  - Variables basics - assigning values and printing contents of variables
  - Create and use container-type variables to hold multiple sets of data
  - Define functions that take parameters and return values
  - Test and debug functions
  - Learn the basics of data arrays and the NumPy library
dependsOn: [technology_and_tooling.ide]
summary: |
  Procedural Programming is based around the idea that code should be structured
  into a sequence of **procedures** that operate on data. This course will
  introduce you to the basics of procedural programming in either Python or C++.
attribution:
  - citation: This material has been adapted from the "Software Engineering" module of the SABS R³ Center for Doctoral Training.
    url: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk
    image: https://www.sabsr3.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/styles/site_logo/public/styles/site_logo/public/sabsr3/site-logo/sabs_r3_cdt_logo_v3_111x109.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
  - citation: This course material was developed as part of UNIVERSE-HPC, which is funded through the SPF ExCALIBUR programme under grant number EP/W035731/1
    url: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk
    image: https://www.universe-hpc.ac.uk/assets/images/universe-hpc.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

## The Procedural Paradigm

Procedural Programming is based around the idea that code should be structured
into a sequence of **procedures** that operate on data. Each procedure
(optionally) takes some input, performs some computation and (optionally)
returns some output. We can then use these procedures to perform computation,
without having to be concerned with exactly how the computation is performed.

You may wish to think of the Procedural Paradigm as focussing on the **verbs**
of a computation.
